Archetypal Elements
Archetypal Elements are powerful elements in any composition. In the landscape they are a compelling medium to connect the outside world with the human psyche. Landscape architects must approach the landscape as an entity which inherently contains unique and profound quality and meaning to consciously recognize and operate with the landscape elements, especially when designing for mental health and well-being.
The word archetype comes from ancient Greek ɑrkɪtaɪp meaning an original pattern or model. In art history, archetypes are referred to as “primordial images”. This term was borrowed by early psychiatrists, such as Carl Gustav Jung, whose theory of archetypes is particularly interesting from the standpoint of landscape design. According to Jung, archetypes are universal, archaic patterns or images present in our world and copied and emulated across centuries. It constitutes a part of what he called the collective unconscious, a heritage of human development for centuries, shared regardless of the space and time they live in. The archetypes exhibit “a kind of readiness to produce over and over again the same or similar mythical ideas” (Jung, 1966, p. 35). Moreover, an archetype is the psyche’s counterpart of the bodily instinct and “works in a human being in the same way as an instinct which, for example, makes birds build their nest in a certain way” (Jung, 1976). Together with scientific and technological advancements and growing urbanization, people may lose connection with the “soul” as per its classical notion and with real human experience – which, according to Jung, originates from one’s identification with nature. This loss can lead to alienation and psychological imbalance, as the sense of belonging to one’s natural surroundings is essential for healthy and balanced mental functioning.
Jung identified archetypes based on the anthropological and cultural research as well as the analysis of his patients’ dreams. He noticed that sometimes their dreams involved images that were not part of their individual past, but rather are repeating mythical and religious themes found within the heritage of cultures scattered around the globe. Among the archetypes Jung distinguished situations (hero’s quest, night-sea journey, and battle for deliverance from the mother) and figures (divine child, the double, the old sage, and the primordial mother) (Jung, 1955). Aside from archetypes, he also investigated symbols, which are as powerful as archetypes and conform to the individual and collective unconscious content around the archetype, evoking a strong, emotionally charged response. He stated:
“The history of symbolism shows that everything can assume symbolic significance: natural objects (like stones, plants, animals, men, mountains and valleys, sun and moon, wind, water, and fire), or man-made things (like houses, boats, or cars), or even abstract forms (like numbers, or the triangle, the square, and the circle).”
(Jung, 1955, p. 232)
None of Jung’s archetypes or symbols were given a single, clear definition, being instead a rather fluid and evolving concept. Moreover, Jung never definitively pronounced his list of archetypes, leaving room for future investigators. This stimulated continuing criticism of his school of thought, accusing it of a lack of consistency and scientific rigor. Interestingly, it didn’t prevent the archetypes from becoming one of the most popular and influential concepts in psychology and beyond. Contemporary analytical psychology and psychiatry attempted to break down Jungian archetypes into different conceptualizations. In most of them, the biological phenomena and entities have played a significant role (Knox, 2003; Roesler, 2012). The nature-derived archetypal elements carry an exceptionally powerful symbolic meaning, which has been building up since prehistoric times, predating any language, religion, or cultural phenomena.
Around a decade ago, the concept of Jungian archetypes caught my attention. I have noticed that there are some features in landscapes, which, quite mysteriously, stand out from the rest of the scenery, trigger memories or strong emotions, and even cause specific behaviors (for example, seeing a hill we instinctively want to stand on its summit). I recognized archetypal elements as a more justified and profound term of what has been called “scarce”, “rare”, or “feature” elements by environmentalists and landscape architects. For this reason, I included them as one of the main categories in the Contemplative Landscape Model. Since the publication of the original list of CLM Archetypal Elements, I have been able to observe a growing interest in the Jungian concept in the area of environmental psychology and landscape design. Environmental researchers underlined the importance of capturing and describing the meaning and content in the landscape through acknowledging the nature-like archetypal elements (Cullum et al., 2017; Grahn et al., 2021; Hreško et al., 2015). Grahn et al., suggested that nature-linked archetypes could be connected to activation of archaic psychophysiological systems, including oxytocin (happiness hormone) production, which is a great example of the positive effects of nature exposure. In another article, they explain the growing interest of landscape architects in the topic of archetypes, attributing it to globalization and uniformization of design of urban green spaces across countries, but also to a growing body of research on the health benefits of spending time with elements of nature (Ottosson & Grahn, 2021). Environmental researchers proposed their lists of nature-derived archetypes, which include some that might appear quite vague and hence problematic to implement in landscape projects: the storm, the sun, the moon, the path, and the garden of Eden (Ottosson & Grahn, 2021) and: empty tomb, stella-obelisk, spiralcircle, cosmic mountain-large rock, cosmic dome, cosmic arch, cosmic tree-garden and light-water (KhajehSaeed et al., 2021). Other authors have described more straight-forward archetypal elements, which can be found in natural landscapes, making these landscapes particularly unique. These include: tree, desert (Wilkinson, 2015), waterfall, mountain, and dense trees (Xing & Chen, 2018).
The Contemplative Landscape Model proposes nine general Archetypal Elements: water, path, clearing, mountain/hill, single old tree, stone/rock, forest, desert, circle. They are the visual features relevant for the design of urban green spaces, which landscape architects can introduce in practically any context. Each of them carry a powerful symbolic meaning, evoke personal or collective memories, elicit an emotional response, and induce contemplation. According to the construct of the collective unconscious, this is expected to occur universally, even if the element is unfamiliar. It would be tempting to use scientific tools to check to what extent exposure to archetypes can influence mental health. However, neuroscientists see a particular problem with this approach. Namely, they cannot measure nor interfere with the constructs that merely exist in the human collective unconscious, which casts doubt on the validity of this construct. Having the archetypes present in the physical space such as a landscape scene can partially solve this problem. Because it is possible to measure the brain reactivity to individual landscape features presented in isolation or in comparison with others with the neuroscience tools (e.g., Olszewska-Guizzo et al., 2022).
The following pages will explain the meaning and possible effect of the most important archetypal elements that can be introduced in the designed space. Moreover, there will be some tips on incorporating them into design.

10.1 FOREST, PATH, AND CLEARING
The forest, according to the Jungian perspective, has a maternal significance, meaning that it is the primary nurturer. The abundance of objects in it (trees, branches, etc.) can represent the multitude of elements in our everyday life. Throughout human history, forests have been both terrifying (a dark, unfamiliar place, populated by bizarre beings and beasts, where one can easily get lost) and uplifting (calm, serene, providing shelter).
The path is a very common element of any manmade space, so it might seem tricky to look at it as something loaded with symbolic meaning. There are some paths, however, that clearly stand out from the whole design and are explicitly serving the visitor a safe passage to a destination. A path can lead through the forest or through any other type of space. In all circumstances, the path has a connotation with the human course through life, and it can, in religious terms, be leading to enlightenment. Finally, the forest clearing, according to Jung, is a symbol of self-awareness, enlightenment, and wholeness, which leads to healing of the mind and self-restoration. Openness and clearness of the view promise better control and solutions to problems encountered on one’s way. Heinrich Hermann, designer and author of the essay “On the Transcendent in Landscapes of Contemplation” defines the clearing as a:
“space of absence, a free offering to the human spirit that is not utilitarian in economy-driven functional terms, but highly important, and indeed unforgettable in psychological-experiential terms.”
(Hermann, 2005, p. 60)
The clearing becomes an even more interesting element once we consider that it could be the prototype of gardens designed by nature. In The History of Gardens, Christopher Thacker states that there is “no doubt about it. The first gardens were not made but discovered. They were a natural spot such as a clearing in the forest” (Thacker, 1985, p. 9). During a hike through the pristine rainforest of Taman Negara National Park in Malaysia (Figure 10.1), I spotted one such garden clearing. Perhaps, by following primordial instincts, clearings have been replicated in urban spaces around the globe and have become the main elements of parks and gardens.
Figure 10.1 First gardens were likely clearings discovered in forests. A clearing inside the pristine rainforest Taman Negara National Park, Malaysia.
The forest, path, and clearing in the landscape can of course occur separately, but when they are together, they create a narrative of journey to enlightenment, which is worth discussing. Walking through a forested space with tall and dense planting or shrubbery, along a distinct path, eventually leading to a bright opening, where one can suddenly see the sky, is synonymous to travelling towards psychological wholeness and enlightenment.
Today, forests are increasingly introduced into urban landscapes for their ability to create a stronger feeling of re-connection with nature. The forest is “a contemplative space, conjuring daydreams about nature and time . . . providing the materialization of a dream” (Krinke, 2005, p. 123). Moreover, the so-called forest therapy or forest bathing (in Japanese shinrin- yoku) has gained popularity as a nature-based therapy to soothe the senses. According to Japanese researchers, there is a range of therapeutic effects when walking in the forest. The EKLIPSE systematic review (Beute .et al., 2020) reports six Japanese forest bathing studies with fair or good confidence of no bias. They have generally found improved mood and lower stress after walking in the forest. However, there are limitations to the Japanese studies, such as the relatively small number of participants, who were mostly students, and often only male. Also, these studies mostly compare a walk through the forest to a walk through the city. This is not enough to conclude or suggest whether forests outperform other types of landscapes in terms of their therapeutic effect. Regardless, the worldwide publicity of Japanese shinrin-yoku has done its job, and forest bathing has become a profitable business model. It is now possible to get a forest therapy guide license for a couple of thousands of dollars, or join a forest bathing retreat. There is absolutely nothing wrong with this, as long as the dark side of forest and its associated archetypal meaning is acknowledged. If the walk-through forest is not designed adequately, such as being too dark and dense, it might be unbeneficial for health or even harmful. Even though most studies report the benefits, there are also some that point out the negative effects of forest exposure. For example, in an Australian study, dementia patients displayed increased anxiety upon VR forest exposure (Moyle et al., 2018) and in a Swiss study participants showed less mood improvement after exposure to wild compared to tended forest (Martens et al., 2011). Moreover, in some neurodivergent groups, such as autistic children, dense tree canopy was linked to anxiety (Larson et al., 2018). Therefore, it is essential for landscape architects to be cautious when introducing strong archetypes in their designs. One way to achieve this is to lead the visitor to the edge of the forest. In fact, one study reported mental health improvement from the experience of the contrast between the forest and its edge (Tsai et al., 2018). On the other hand, paths should be designed in a way that emphasizes the contemplative character of a journey towards enlightenment. Walking along the contemplative path should be a sequence of spatial events, which happen at irregular intervals along a continuous and distinctive way. A path through the forest should be clear and distinct and lead to a desired destination, such as a space of retreat and respite at a clearing or edge of the forest (Figure 10.2). This particular experience is reminiscent of the savannah-preference theory, and the preference for open views.
10.2 DESERT
The desert is a space of absence and emptiness, which is the spatial manifestation of psychological aloneness. It can be considered an extension of the archetype of a clearing in its amplified form. The desert landscape is very dramatic and the dialogue between the ground and the sky is as extreme as the weather phenomena, possible mirages, and conditions to sustain life. The natural features of the desert and the relationship between the human and the surrounding space facilitate and enable contemplation through the sense of stillness and silence. According to Jung, it is a symbol of an all-encompassing void that can bring us closer to the experience of the boundlessness of the inner essence of a human. It is a space of great clarity of vision, allowing one to perceive without being perceived by anyone, being away from the influence of others, without any hope for their assistance. The experience of the endlessness of the wilderness, the simplicity, and the peculiar condensation of the space-time of the void, makes life stand in front of us in all its greatness and significance. Roger S. Ulrich, who devised the stress reduction theory, claimed that the vastness and openness of desert-like landscapes can cause insecurity and anxiety as much as dense forests can (Ulrich et al., 1991). However, according to Jung, despite its potential to be uncomfortable, the experience of the void is a basic existential experience, which all of us very much need (Jung, 1955). Experiences that cause stress and discomfort to the body and mind have often been recognized as beneficial. Some basic examples of these include working out, fasting, and attending meditation retreats. Therefore, the brief experience of the emptiness of the desert seems to be a promising way to provide a much-needed restorative effect, reorientation, and even a feeling of liberation from everyday problems, especially to urban residents. Existential experiences such as getting lost in the forest or losing one’s way in the desert – as long as there is a psychological potential of getting out from these situations – can provoke the contemplation of insight. These experiences can be carefully planned within the contemplative landscape design.
Figure 10.2 Archetype of the path (a) in an ancient Sacred Grove Mawphlang, India, (Ranjana Shah) (b) in the dense city of Singapore.
10.3 WATER
The topic of water in the landscape and its meaning is as wide and deep as the ocean. Many books have been dedicated to this single topic, and this is still only breaching the surface. Water is a truly unique substance and a necessary component for most things on Earth – that pale blue dot in the universe, that calls for a quote from Carl Sagan:
“It has been said that astronomy is a humbling and character-building experience. There is perhaps no better demonstration of the folly of human conceits than this distant image of our tiny world. To me, it underscores our responsibility to deal more kindly with one another, and to preserve and cherish the pale blue dot, the only home we’ve ever known.”
–Carl Sagan, Pale Blue Dot, 1994
In fact, all the areas dominated by surface waterbodies or watercourses are treated separately from green spaces in urban planning and are aptly named blue spaces.
Water in the landscape induces in people a powerful response and positive emotions. It can dominate any scene, regardless of whether it appears as a small glimpse or a large expanse. The mere presence of water in the view is capable of significantly raising the preference of a given landscape view. Burton R. Litton, landscape architecture professor and conservationist of the USDA Forest Service, attributes the power of water in the landscape to “its visibility, its movement, reflections, and color, its consequent contrasts to adjacent earth surfaces” (Litton, 1977). But the appeal of water is not only rooted in its aesthetic value.
Water is essential for the survival and development of human civilization. Therefore, the reasons for its high distinctness is accredited to its deep connection to human evolution (Herzog & Bosley, 1992). Moreover, there is a profound spiritual significance of water features originating from ancient cultures and religions. Ryback & Yaw (Ryback & Yaw, 1976) investigated the value of water as a sacred element, for the ancient Greeks for example, where the mountain springs provided a mythical “fountain of youth” and “water of life”. Judaism, Christianity, and Islam all associate water with life events: baptism (Christianity), immersion before marriage (Judaism and Islam), and cleansing the body prior to burial (Burmil et al., 1999).
Water is central to life itself, to our lives and to the life of our planet as a whole. Certainly, it would not be left unnoticed by the collective unconscious. In Jungian psychoanalysis, it symbolizes the mystery of creation, birth-death-resurrection, purification and redemption, fertility and growth. Different forms of water in the natural world can have different symbolic meanings:
• Sea – the mother of all life, spiritual mystery and infinity, death and rebirth, timelessness and eternity, and the unconscious.
• River – death and rebirth (baptism), the flowing of time into eternity, transitional phases of the life cycle, and incarnations of deities.
• Waterfall – the dualistic structure of the psyche: because the body
of falling water connects the high with the low. A waterfall unifies
the two poles, two extremes, providing a unity of our psychic nature
that lies in the center (Jung, 1955, p. 269). Two case examples of the
use of the waterfall in the urban landscape are featured in this book:
(1) The 9/11 Memorial in New York (see Box 10.1), and Jewel at
Changi Airport (see Chapter 11).
• Lake in the valley – is the unconscious, which lies underneath the
conscious, and can therefore be referred to as the ‘subconscious’,
usually with the pejorative connotation of an inferior consciousness.
• Water mirror – confrontation with the truth, bringing one closer
to one’s true self, provoking psychological introversion and
contemplation.

“True, whoever looks into the mirror of the water will see first of all his own face. Whoever goes to himself risks a confrontation with himself. The mirror does not flatter, it faithfully shows whatever looks into it; namely, the face we never show to the world because we cover it with the persona, the mask of the actor. But the mirror lies behind the mask and shows the true face.” (Jung, 1964, p. 20)
Given the multitude of water forms in the landscape and the strong symbolic meaning it has, landscape scenes containing water – the blue spaces – have been recognized as the most desirable for mental health and well-being (Tafahomi & Nadi, 2022). Systematic reviews have pointed at positive associations between the availability of blue spaces with mental health outcomes through stress-reduction, improved social interactions and, indirectly, through increased physical activity near water (Gascon et al., 2017; Nutsford et al., 2016; White et al., 2013). The most recent systematic review by EKLIPSE, “Types and characteristics of urban and peri-urban blue spaces having an impact on human mental health and wellbeing”, highlighted the most consistent effects of exposure to waterscapes on mood and mood disorders as well as the beneficial characteristics of blue spaces, including visual openness and water movement (Beute et al., 2020).
In their book Restorative Cities: Urban Design for Mental Health and Wellbeing, Jenny Roe and Layla McCay emphasized the importance of design that fosters human interactions with water from walking along rivers, playing in a fountain, or just a passive exposure to waterbodies (Roe & McCay, 2021).
Figure 10.3 Archetype of water in the landscape (a) mysterious “Emerald Pool”, Krabi, Thailand, b) dynamic water as an important part of the business district landscape design, European Square, Warsaw, Poland.

Box 10.1 Archetype of Waterfall at the National 9/11 Memorial (New York City, USA)
“Its design conveys a spirit of hope and renewal, and creates a contemplative space separate from the usual sights and sounds of a bustling metropolis. Swamp white oak trees create a rustling canopy of leaves over the plaza. This grove of trees brings green rebirth in the spring, provides cooling shade in the summer and shows seasonal color in fall.” (Schechner, 2014, p. 78)
The Memorial is located at the site of the former World Trade Center complex and occupies approximately half of the 16-acre (6-ha) site. It was designed by architect Michael Arad and landscape architect Peter Walker, and features two substantial waterfalls and reflecting pools, set within the outlines of the original Twin Towers.
This memorial was created to be a place of commemorative contemplation. Contemplation about life and death and the transitory nature of human existence are the most obvious themes, but a memorial can also serve as a reminder of the collective human family. This place fulfills the purpose of an urban green contemplative space, despite also serving as a piece of contemporary art. Referring to the tragedy that took place here on 11 September 2001, it carries a heavy symbolism, including the symbol of the waterfall. It was moving to visit this place in person and experience the onsite atmosphere, which certainly stimulated plenty of contemplation during my time there. This particularly contemplative power is not only induced by the spirit of the place, so-called genius loci (Tuan, 1997), and the tragic events of 9/11 that transpired there, but also by the designer’s masterly use of the waterfall archetype. The waterfall, as a medium to connect what’s above with what’s beyond, constitutes a link between the visitor and the victims of the attacks.
The space, even though it is located in the core of the bustling city center, provides a sense of reorientation and reflective solitude. The sound of falling water drowns the urban noise and the enclosure of trees provides visual separation from the surrounding Manhattan city-scape.
Figure 10.4 Massive waterfall filling in the space where the Twin Towers of the World Trade Center once stood. Even though the site is full of visitors, it gives a sense of solitude and reorientation from the chaos of New York City.

10.4 SINGLE OLD TREE
“It was strange how all large trees had their own personalities, expressed through their unique forms and the aura created by the combined effect of the trunk and roots, the bark and branches, the light and shadow. It was as if they could speak. Not with voices, of course, but with what they were, they seemed to stretch out to whoever looked at them. And that was all they spoke about, what they were, nothing else . . . I heard these voices, or felt the impact these extremely slow-growing organisms had.” (Knausgaard, 2014)
Trees tend to be the most obvious landscape elements of green spaces, and can sometimes be taken for granted. But landscape architects, who often perceive phenomena of nature with an artistic eye, will see in every tree a perfect, organic, and most precious sculpture. With so many types, sizes, and varieties of trees and groups of trees, not all of them will create a psychologically meaningful archetypal element. The symbolic tree will grow as a solitaire (or distinctive group) and will have a distinctive shape. A single, old majestic Platanus tree growing in front of the hermitage Moni Panachrantou in Greece serves as a prime example (Figure 10.5).
Figure 10.5 A heritage Platanus tree at the entrance to the hermitage Moni Panachrantou, Andros, Greece.
The archetypal meaning of the tree is connected to the regenerative powers of nature and stands for the inexhaustibleness of life. It is therefore a symbol of life and immortality. A single old tree has been considered the axis of the world and the central element of the universe in many mythologies (e.g., Yggdrasil in Norse mythology). However, its symbolism extends even further to represent concepts such as evolution, physical growth, and psychological maturation. Growth, in nature and in humanity, generally comes involuntary and organically, slowly but powerfully, which, according to Jung, fulfills the pattern of a tree. The single tree can also have a vast array of symbolic meanings rooted in ancient traditions (Jung, 1964). In the Christian tradition, it symbolizes the birth of Jesus and the ever-present mystery – the origins of the Christmas tree. Another example is in West Africa where the tribesmen have a “u ju”, or spirit tree, to which they ascribe magical power (Jung, 1964).
The tree is a powerful symbol as a design element introduced to the space. It can stimulate reflection on self-growth, life persistence, and strength. A well-placed and maintained solitary tree can be a powerful archetypal element in the landscape and, at the same time, work as an orientation point for wayfinding or as a meeting place.

10.5 STONE/ROCK
In primitive cultures, rough, natural stones in the landscape were often places of spirits or gods, or were used as graves (Jung, 1964, p. 232). Also, in many primitive stone sanctuaries, the deity is represented not by a single stone but by many great unhewn stones, arranged in distinct patterns – the geometrical stone alignments in Brittany and the stone circle at Stonehenge are famous examples (see also Figure 10.6). Arrangements of rough natural stones also play a considerable role in the highly civilized rock gardens of Zen Buddhism. The Old Testament (Torah) speaks of stones in many verses, often as sacred stones or sacred places. Stones have been placed on peoples’ graves (tombstones) across cultures for centuries, which could spring from the symbolic idea that  something eternal of the deceased person remains, which can be most fittingly represented by a stone. Although the human body and soul would rarely be described as physically resembling a stone, this essence of the earth has come to symbolize “mere existence at the farthest removes from the emotions, feelings, fantasies, and discursive thinking” (Jung, 1964, p. 209).
The symbolic connotation of a stone in the landscape with death may seem a little scary and disturbing. However, the contemplation of life and death and the cyclical aspect of nature is a profound and psychologically restorative process. This insightful contemplation can be experienced while walking through a graveyard, for instance. In his essay “Nature and Archetypal Symbols”, Heinrich Hermann writes about the contemplative landscape of Asplund and Lewerentz’s Woodland Cemetery in Stockholm. One of the most prominent zones of the cemetery is the birch forest with simple forest tombs set on the blanket of a lush green lawn, which he describes as follows:
“most tombstones face east, toward the rising sun (of renewal?) while visitors standing in front of them are facing the setting sun (of life departed). One cannot help but recognize the apparent desire to maintain the fundamental human ties to the cosmic cycles with its important implications for the living . . . aged stones in the older areas act more powerfully as archetypal symbols. In this setting one cannot help but recognize that the deceased have long ago returned to the earth and have even potentially fed the life of nearby trees. One may begin to imagine oneself buried here and being observed by someone else, perhaps a century from now, surrounding a recognition of the interconnectedness of human life. These forest tombs bring forth not just an intellectual, rational response that one might have in any burial ground, but a palpable emotional reaction.”
(Hermann, 2005, pp. 57–58)
Figure 10.6 Stone arrangement in the ancient Sacred Grove, Mawphlang, India. Source: Ranjana Shah.
10.6 MOUNTAIN/HILL
The archetypal element of the mountain can be physically manifested by any type of above-ground level elevation, such as a hill, mound, or even a viewing tower. A diverse landform connected with the presence of that elevation in the landscape was mentioned before as important for inducing long-distance views or stimulation to look up to the sky. Besides these, the presence of a hill in the landscape invites one to its summit. It seems that the will of climbing the mountain/hill is connected to its archetypal meaning, thus the top of the hill represents a goal to accomplish and the promise of glory. According to Jungian theory, this deep instinct comes from the will to accomplish a test of strength and maturity. “It is the will to achieve ego-consciousness in the heroic phase of adolescent development” (Jung, 1955, p. 132).
The mountain is also a link between heaven and earth. Frye in Anatomy of Criticism calls its peak the “point of epiphany” and supplies multiple examples of the mountain-tops, towers, and staircases of the Bible, Dante, Yeats, and T.S. Eliot (Northrop Frye, 1957). This suggests that any type of element allowing us to reach new heights may carry some symbolic connotation. The act of climbing a mountain or ascending the stairs can bring a special type of wonder. Moving up and looking upwards can stimulate a feeling of moving to a higher spiritual plane. The archetype of a mountain or hill in an urban green space can be introduced visually by opening a view towards a distant mountain or hilltop, or literally by introducing new hills or mounds or emphasizing the existing ones. Incorporating all sorts of high viewing points, elevated terraces, treehouses, and so forth can also activate the symbolic meaning of the archetype of a mountain.
10.7 CIRCLE
Of all geometric figures, the circle carries the most embedded power. It does not exist in nature in its perfect form. However, as an idea and shape introduced often into landscape designs, it can carry a strong symbolic meaning (Weilacher, 1999). A circle (or sphere) signifies wholeness and unity. The mandala is a geometric figure based on the squaring of a circle around a unifying center, and conveys a desire for spiritual unity and psychic integration. The circle also symbolizes an egg (oval) representing the mystery of life and the forces of changing generations. In the Yin-Yang symbol, the circle is a symbol representing the union of opposite forces of the Yang (masculine principle: light, activity) and the Yin (feminine principle: darkness, passivity). Marie-Louise von Franz,  Jungian psychologist and scholar, has explained the circle (or sphere) as a symbol of the self. It expresses the totality of the psyche in all its aspects, including the relationship between man and the whole of nature.
Whether the symbol of the circle appears in primitive sun worship or modern religion, in myths or dreams, in the mandalas drawn by Tibetan monks, in the ground plans of cities, or in the spherical concepts of early astronomers, it always points to the single most vital aspect of life – its ultimate wholeness (Franz, 2008).
Figure 10.7 Mountain/hill as a dominant archetypal feature (a) in a traditional village setting Kampung Budaya Sarawak, Borneo, Malaysia; (b) in an urban park, Gardens by the Bay, Singapore.

In landscape design, the use of circles adds a significant visual interest, leading the eye to its center and connecting with other forms. To boost the circle’s archetypal potential, it is to be used sparingly and intentionally, at a grand scale for concentric ordering of the space.
A circle can be emulated by natural and architectural forms, such as an arch or dome. The dome – a hemispherical semi-elliptical roof – has been a cosmic symbol representing heaven in many religions. In fact, the sky over our heads is the greatest dome constituting a ceiling of the landscape. In contemplative landscape design, it is important to drive the eyes of an observer up, through so-called skyward-oriented spaces. Looking into the vastness of a sky-dome, moving clouds, or stars has always been associated with contemplation. The arch – a section of a dome – symbolically is a portal between time and space, opening new perspectives. In many cultures, it has served as a symbol of renewal and rebirth. With such symbolism, the arch can be well adapted to the landscape design for the restoration of mental health and replenishment of energies.
Figure 10.8 Use of concentric circles in the urban space, Portland, OR, USA.

Regardless of whether archetypes are scientifically sound constructs and whether they correspond to a real biological phenomena, when they appear in the landscape, they can trigger a strong emotional reaction, creating a bridge between the physical and psychological world.

Box 10.2 Neuropsychological parameters of Archetypal Elements
Figure 10.9 Proportional area charts illustrating the extent to which the Archetypal Elements component contributes to the positive neuropsychological outcomes of urban park users. Results are based on the correlation of expert CLM scoring, EEG scores, and self-reported mood scores acquired from research studies in urban parks. Source: Olszewska-Guizzo et al. (2022, 2023).
The explicit presence of any of the above presented Archetypal Elements within the landscape scene quite significantly contributed to the overall mental health and well-being scores as per neuropsychological studies (Olszewska-Guizzo et al., 2022, 2023, see Figure 10.9). This places this particular contemplative component as third in the ranking of CLM components, with an estimated 17% contribution to the overall mental health and well-being scores, as per brain scanning and self-reported mood measurements.
Out of these measures it seems that most of the benefits from Archetypal Elements in the landscape are transferred subconsciously. They equally affect the wakeful relaxation mechanisms (18%, second rank), marked with frontal Alpha oscillations and the mindfulness response (18%, second rank). This suggests that when the designer’s intention is to slow down the brain activity of the observers, it is recommended to utilize Archetypal Elements as a second-priority component in the scene. Simultaneously, Archetypal Elements contribute slightly less to self-reported (subjective) good mood (17%, third rank) marked with the positive valence scores. If the subjective good mood is the primary focus of the landscape design, introducing Archetypal Elements should be then adequately  prioritized.


Scoring of the Archetypal elements dimension

I Look at the landscape 
II Consider these questions 
- Are any of the archetypal elements described in Chapter 10 present in the scene? 
- Are there any other elements present that might carry a symbolic meaning to most people? 
- Is the presence of archetypal elements dominating and important to the scene? 
- To what extent do these elements capture the viewer's attention? 

III Give your score 
5 or 6 points:If the archetypal elements strongly influence the overall perception.
3 or 4 points: If the archetypal elements are present, but not important for the overall perception. 
1 or 2 points: If there are no archetypal elements in the scene.