Biodiversity
The term biodiversity has gained considerable popularity and value over the last few years. It refers to the variety of plant and animal species in the given ecosystem, in other words, the richness (how many) of species inhabit a specific area. However, more and more often it has been used in the literature to define holistically the representatives of all kingdoms of living things in the ecosystem. And this is also the meaning that it is used here, for this key category of CLM.
Traditionally the landscape architects’ principal material of craftsmanship has been plants and (more indirectly) animals. Their formal training includes the recognition of plant and animal species and the types of habitats where they naturally evolve. Their knowledge includes plant characteristics as seasonal changes of vegetation, for example, whether the trees will turn orange in the fall or remain the same throughout the year. They also know which flowers will attract bees and which are good for bird nesting. This sort of knowledge is important for both identifying and designing contemplative landscapes. What is less common in the landscape architect practice is a more perceptual quality-oriented approach when it comes to plant and animal diversity in relation to design style.
This chapter will discuss some of the main qualities of flora and fauna that the human brain can perceive and process, how these can influence mental health and well-being, and how they can be integrated into the design process.

8.1 WILD AND PLENTIFUL LIFE FORMS
What makes any object perceived as alive is its motion, or change. We are accustomed to nature being constantly in motion and subject to cycles. This is why in contemplative design strategies to experience this aliveness is important. Temporal changes in the vegetation recall the natural cycles and our place in these cycles. This would include allowing for the observation of the seasonal and daily changes in plants and animals.
The animals and plants in the landscape are not only integral and fundamental elements of any functioning ecosystem but also key perceptual components of the scenery that make it vibrant and alive. Therefore, they are very important for human-nature interaction and the therapeutic potential of urban green spaces. However, the presence of animals and plants are, perhaps quite surprisingly, not the determinant of health-inducing mechanisms in humans. In fact, one can imagine areas full of vegetation and animals that do not have much contemplative value (an extreme example may be a plot of land with ruderal plants and a puddle of water infested with flies and mosquitos). At the same time, there are landscape settings where unanimated objects dominate, which are considered contemplative and therapeutic. One very obvious example of the latter is the beach environment.
The typical oceanic beach is mainly composed of sand or rocks and water – no plants or animals can be seen while gazing towards the horizon. Beachfronts however are the best studied blue space environments with the highest salutogenic potential as shown by the recent systematic review on blue spaces (Beute et al., 2020). The desert environment is quite a similar example. Studies show that the experience of the desert is one of the most profound existential and contemplative experiences, triggering reflection and wonder. Although it is in fact rich in species and lifeforms, this is often not visible for a visitor during the daytime. A recent study reported that the desert VR experience reduced stress more effectively than the green/vegetated space (Yin et al., 2022). Another study showed that a two-day excursion into the natural landscape of the Sonoran Desert, where participants had chances to hike, stargaze, and enjoy the crater’s scenery, increased their level of feeling oneself as a part of nature and within it, as measured with Nature Connectedness, Nature Relatedness, and Love and Care for Nature scales (Garza-Teran et al., 2022) (read more in Chapter 10:
Archetypal Elements). This is not by any means to suggest that instead of greening we should turn green spaces into deserts, but rather, be aware that merely adding green into cities might not be enough. “Just making the cities greener does not necessarily mean that they will promote health” (Stigsdotter & Sidenius, 2020). Thus, what people actually perceive may have far more impact on their health than actual ecological metrics of environmental quality.

 
The beach and desert examples bring about the issue of perceived versus actual ecological values of the landscape scene. From the standpoint of CLM, it is always what can be perceived by the human senses of a layperson (not necessarily trained in ecology, botany, etc.) While some studies indicate that higher biodiversity is positively correlated with good mental health outcomes (Fuller et al., 2007; Luck et al., 2011), other studies underline the lack of a consistent relationship between actual richness of plant, butterfly, and bird species and the mental health of urban greenspace visitors, signaling the mismatch between perceived and actual biodiversity, which can even pose a “challenge for aligning conservation and human well-being agendas” (Dallimer et al., 2012).
According to CLM, the perception of wilderness and richness in species is what triggers re-connection with nature and the contemplative experience rather than the actual ecological metrics, such as the commonly used biodiversity measurement – Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI). In fact, remote-sensing studies based on the NDVI data showed inconsistencies in correlation with health outcomes (e.g., Graça et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2017).
Apparently, triggering the health-promoting, contemplative experience only requires that vegetation seems to be wild, naturally-sown, native, and spontaneous. The landscape scene should appear rich in diverse species of plants and animals and not overly tended by humans. Ulrika Stigsdotter, in her doctoral thesis titled Landscape Architecture and Health, evidence-based health-promoting design and planning, suggests that the vegetation of such healthy space should be characterized as “Plants seem self-sown, (presence of) lichen and moss-grown rocks, old paths” (Stigsdotter, 2005, p. 17). This planting strategy again reflects the work of the Kaplans, who first established the concept of “wilderness experience” and “nearby nature”, which are vital for the restorative effect and help alleviate mental fatigue (Kaplan & Kaplan, 1989). However, their body of work also confirms that settings that are too wild cause stress and anxiety rather than restoration, thus we feel unsafe, lost, and out of control.
There is a tipping point after which too much nature, plants, and animals start to negatively impact our mental health and well-being, as described in Chapter 6: Compatibility in the context of keeping the right balance between wild and tamed nature. This directly connects to the concept of biophilia and its opposite – biophobia. There are some sorts of natural phenomena, like snakes, spiders, darkness, blood, and so on (see Figure 8.1), which cause an immediate strong negative reaction in humans (Ottosson et al., 2015; Ulrich, 1993).

Figure 8.1 Examples of biophobic phenomena in the landscape, attributed to a sense of vision,  hearing, and smell.

Box 8.1
Figure 8.2 Urban wetland providing a sense of wilderness experience to city residents. Tanner Springs Park, Portland, OR, USA.

Tanner Springs Park, Portland, Oregon is an example of the successful implementation of a fully functioning wetland habitat into a high-density urban fabric. Designed by Rambol Studio Dreiseitl and launched in 2009, it links back to Tanner Creek, which used to pass through the site historically. Its planting plan follows the composition of four major local plant communities: freshwater pond, emergent wetland, wet prairie, and oak woodland (Flicker, 2011). Being the size of only one block (~4,200 m2) and surrounded by residential and services buildings, it still provides a sense of serenity through wilderness experience for anyone who descends the concrete steps and crosses the wetland though the incorporated path. One can touch the water and plants, listen to the chatter of the frogs, observe colorful dragonflies, and spot migratory birds stopping by this place.

8.2 GEOMETRIC VS. NATURALISTIC PLANTING
Throughout the history of garden and landscape design there has been a lasting competition between two schools of thought: geometrized design as an attempt to defy natural forms, and the opposite approach, where nature is considered perfect as it is.
And so, the gardens of Mannerism (Hans Vredeman de Vries (1527– 1606) was a well-known practitioner) had broken the harmony of the Renaissance works with complex composition and an intentional refinement of nature. The gardens began to display the prominence of art and culture over nature. Designers of this time perceived the garden as a work of art, dominated by architecture, with intriguing and artificial forms (Zachariasz, 2010). Garden masterplans were dominated by axially arranged garden interiors based on intricate square plans, surrounded by balustrades, hedges, labyrinths, or green galleries. Later on, the French gardens of the seventeenth century extended this trend to the extreme, focusing on endless perspectives and ornamental floors arranged in rigorous, geometric arrangements of even more pronounced architecture of vegetation: rows and hedges making nature subordinated to Euclidean geometry (Baridon, 1998).
The English gardens developed during Romanticism challenged these tendencies. They rejected the symmetry and regularity of geometric gardens and focused entirely on the beauty of nature. Alexander Pope, a famous poet of these times, encourages designers to get inspired by nature and the spirit of place, so-called genius loci; in his poem “Epistle to Burlington”, which can well be a landscape architect’s manifesto, he writes:
“. . . In all, let Nature never be forgot. But treat the Goddess like a modest fair, Nor over-dress, nor leave her wholly bare; Let not each beauty ev’ry where be spy’d, Where half the skill is decently to hide. He gains all points, who pleasingly confounds, Surprizes, varies, and conceals the Bounds. Consult the Genius of the Place in all; That tells the Waters or to rise, or fall, Or helps th’ambitious Hill the heav’ns to scale, Or scoops in circling theatres the Vale; Calls in the Country, catches op’ning glades, Joins willing woods, and varies shades from shades; Now breaks, or now directs, th’ intending Lines, Paints as you plant, and as you work, designs.”
(Epistle IV to Richard Earl of Burlington, Pope, 1881, p. 523)
Figure 8.3 Formal French gardens dominated by straight lines and geometric forms a) Park van Tervuren, Belgium, b) garden of Château d’Yquem, Sauternes, France.

The beginning of the nineteenth century was a moment of increasing criticism towards the drastic interventions to nature typical of the old geometric gardens and the so-called “battle of styles” took place. Frederick Law Olmsted, for instance, used to speak about the differences in perception of a common wildflower on mossy turf with a hybrid of the same species imported from the far east, blooming under glass in an enameled vase. The hybrid was rare and would attract immediate attention, but 
“the former, while we have passed it by without stopping, and while it has not interrupted our conversation or called for remark, may possibly, with other objects of the same class, have touched us more . . .may have had a more soothing and refreshing sanitary influence.”
(Frederick L. Olmsted cit. in Beveridge & Rocheleau, 1995)
His preference for using wild species and naturalistic planting arrangements was in opposition to specimen planting and flower-bedding popular in his times. Olmsted justified the latter as being against the genius loci. Since then we could observe both approaches mixed together in eclectic garden designs, and also diversity in individual choices and styles of private gardens, as well as in city designs. Today’s urban green spaces largely adopt the principles of English gardens, but can have plenty of geometric forms in them as well. Shrubs trimmed in the forms of blocky hedges have become a typical element for many city streetscapes. Modernism brought about new styles and tendencies in design, including Bio-architecture, or Organic architecture, which is largely aligned with the biophilia hypothesis. It was based on the belief that everything geometric and artificial has a detrimental effect on humans, as opposed to biomorphic forms that have a soothing effect on the senses. Professor Luigi Colani, a prominent organic architect, described his style choice as something almost beyond his control:
“Careful observation teaches me that, with the exception of crystals, nothing in nature admits of a straight line. The universe itself is made up of curves, and I can only obey the laws of nature. (. . .) The human eye is not adapted to looking at sharp geometric forms, but at the soft lines and shapes available in nature.”
(Luigi Colani, cit. in, Stein, 1980)
Although there should be no accounting for personal taste in the arts, if we look at shapes and forms from the neuroscience perspective, there is an established advantage of the curvy, asymmetric, and natural lines and shapes. Neuroscience research has established that the curved or broken lines and asymmetric, chaotic patterns will be preferred by our senses, and hence the brain will generate more positive emotions than exposure to straight lines. This applies to humans regardless of ethnical origins (Gómez-Puerto et al., 2013), including even one-week old infants (Fantz & Miranda, 1975) and non-human primates (Munar et al., 2015). There are multiple possible neuropsychological mechanisms explaining this preference, established by the literature (Gómez-Puerto et al., 2016). They include sensorimotor explanations (e.g., natural trajectory of movements of the eyeball or arms is curved as well) (Stratton, 1902), and appraisal-based explanations, such as that sharp contours evoke a sense of threat and fear more than asymmetric forms (Bar & Neta, 2006, 2007).
Undoubtedly, our urban areas are full of sharp angles and edges, straight lines and geometric abstract forms, because it simply is easier to build like that. This is also due to the fact that most cities followed post-modernist design styles where clean geometric forms were central. But given all the reflections on the battle of styles, and the neuroscience research for the places of nature connection and contemplation, we should choose the soothing and smooth lines following natural forms.
Box 8.2 Diverse, naturalistic planting –“The Voice of Urban Nature” Floriade Expo 2022, Netherlands
Figure 8.4 Spontaneous and naturalistic planting plan at Floriade Expo 2022 are setting trends for urban planting style. Source: Joost Emmerik.
The Floriade Expo 2022, located in the municipality of Almere near Amsterdam, featured multiple examples of naturalistic planting, which could well be exemplary cases for the highly contemplative style of planting design, applicable in virtually any climatic region with its native species. Moreover, this approach to planting sets the direction for a more pronounced sense of connection with nature in cities, consistent with contemplative landscape design principles. One of the prominent cases of that practice was featured in the expo pavilion design “The Voice of Urban Nature”, designed by Joyce Oomen from BloomingBusiness, Ronald Boer from De Onkruidenier, and Joost Emmerik from Emmerik garden design and research. It featured naturalistic planting beds composed of regional, native, and seasonally changing species, organized organically and spontaneously. Preparing the species list was rather meticulous and included research and acquisition of various local pioneer, forest, utility, edible, and nectar plants (see Figure 2). However, the method of implementation was based on spontaneity so landscape architects did not follow any formal planting plan. They described it as follows:
Figure 8.5 Pre-construction state, unstructured planting for achieving naturalistic and spontaneous effect. Source: Photos by Joost Emmerik.
The fascinating thing is there is no planting plan. We first determined which plants we wanted to plant in a bed. Then we decided how many of each species we needed; 10% of these, 4% of these, etc. Joyce has done this, mostly on experience, knowing exactly how each plants behaves and when in the year it blossoms/falls back etc. The plants are then grown in the nursery and transported to the site. On site, carts with the plants arrive, and then the planting starts: we take one species of plant and ’throw’ them on the planting bed. Then we move to the next plant and do the same. This we do for all the plants, the further you get in the process, the harder it is to find a spot for each plant, the fuller the planting bed becomes. Only when we scatter all the plants over the planting bed, do we start putting the plants into the soil. So, it’s the number of plants and the positioning on site that determines how the planting looks and will evolve. We don’t make drawings beforehand with the exact position of each plant. (Joost Emmerik).
8.3 HUMAN-ANIMAL RELATIONS IN CITIES
Health-promoting environments are “rich ecologies of the human and the non-human, the social and the natural, the material and immaterial”(Murdoch, 2005). Yet, in urban green space planning and design it seems that the presence of animals in space has been marginalized or at least commodified. Including animals in public space design has increasingly been considered through various health and wellness ventures, such as cat cafes (Plourde, 2014), care farms (Gorman, 2017), and puppy-rooms on university campuses (Gorman, 2019). Such approaches rely on commodification of non-human life for only occasional interaction. It has been argued that co-evolving with other beings such as livestock, wildlife, insects, and so forth could benefit urbanites’ health in a more profound way (Gorman, 2019; Hanlon, 2014). Expanding the interactions and relations between humans and animals in cities, making them more casual and spontaneous (limiting the need for organized activities) could be an optimal way to improve people’s mental health and build community and climate resilience. At the same time, it seems that the level of domestication of the animal species to interact with is not a determining factor, so any animal-based intervention in cities could also contribute to ecosystems restoration (Figure 8.6).
Interestingly, building human-animal relations in cities does not have to mean transforming all public spaces into zoos and safaris. Instead, this can take much more subtle forms. For example, according to Cathy Wise, bird biologist from Audubon Arizona, “I am seeing, now more than ever, there is a real desire of people who live in the city to do something good for the environment, and be part of conservation” so they tend to move to the cities where actions are taken to conserve wildlife habitats – they choose to contribute to certain causes, by moving to specific areas (Biophilic Cities Project, 2019). Phoenix, Arizona, is one of the Biophilic Cities Network partners (www.biophiliccities.org/phoenix) and has invested in a variety of programs to introduce its inhabitants to the world of conservation (nature walks, spontaneous wildlife encounters, birding classes, and so forth). One of the programs is a habitat for local Burrowing Owls, taking place near downtown Phoenix. As the program lead states, “People resonate with owls, they’re cute” and they can engage with the program by getting their hands dirty and volunteering at the sites, or by monitoring the population of owls through videos that are available online (Project, 2019). Such subtle connection with the habitat can also contribute to overall well-being.
More exquisite and direct emphasis on the contact with biodiversity for health can be observed at Singapore’s greenest hospital, the Khoo Tech Puat Hospital, designed by CPG Consultants. Its green roof gardens incorporate food production plots, but also have a focus on various animal species. The plants they grow attract butterflies, which started with only three, but have now multiplied to 35 different butterfly species. Moreover, they purposefully plant trees that attract birds and patients can watch 24 species of tropical birds visiting them at the hospital (Rosalind Tan, Operation Administrative (Biophilic Cities Project, 2012)).
Figure 8.6 Animals present in the urban landscape contribute tremendously to the sense of richness in species, regardless of whether they are wild species or domesticated species typical for pastoral landscapes: a) an owl spotted in the Bloedel Reserve, Seattle, WA, USA (photo credits Natalia Tukan); b) sheep and donkeys in Serralves Park, Porto, Portugal.
Among the various existing examples of reinforcing human-animal relations in cities, it feels like there are still plenty more ideas to be discovered or improved. That includes more research and development being conducted in this area. Still, for creative minds, the sky is a limit, and perhaps in some time, we will be able to live in tune with nonthreatening nature inside the cities.

Box 8.3 Neuropsychological parameters of Biodiversity
Figure 8.7 Proportional area charts illustrating the extent to which the Biodiversity component contributes to the positive neuropsychological outcomes of the urban park users. Results are based on the correlation of expert CLM scoring, EEG scores, and self-reported mood scores acquired from the research studies in urban parks. Source: Olszewska-Guizzo et al. (2022, 2023).
The Biodiversity CLM component, determined by the wild and spontaneous vegetation, presence of animals, and richness of species, among other above described characteristics, ranked fourth in the contribution to the overall mental health and well-being scores as per neuropsychological studies (Olszewska-Guizzo et al., 2022, 2023, see Figure 8.7), with an estimated 16% contribution to the overall positive brain imaging scores and mood self-reports measurement. Out of these measures it seems that the benefits from high Biodiversity scores in the landscape were equally contributing to the wakeful relaxation mechanisms, marked with frontal Alpha oscillations, and the mindfulness response, marked with frontal Theta oscillations (in 16%, fourth rank).
In the design for self-reported (subjective) good mood, the Biodiversity score contributed equally (16%, fourth rank) to the overall positive valence scores.

Scoring of Biodiversity dimension:
I Look at the landscape 
II Consider these questions 

- Are there lots of plant species? 
- Are there any visible animals? 
- Is the vegetation tamed and manicured or rather does it appear wild and spontaneous? 
- What gives motion and dynamism to this scene? 
- Are the plants (likely to) move in the wind, change forms and colors with time of a day or season? 
- Is there any plant, animal, or phenomenon in the 
scene that could make most people feel scared, lost, or uncomfortable? 

III Give your score 
5 or 6 points: If there is a high diversity of species of plants and animals, vegetation seems native and spontaneous, and there are visible changes and motion to the scene.
3 or 4 points:  If there is a moderate diversity of species and moderate possibility of changes and motion. 
1 or 2 points: If there is a low diversity of species, no visible changes or motion, or if there are any biophobic phenomena present in the scene. 