Character of Peace and Silence

The need for peace and silence is an integral part of the human psychobiological make-up, regardless of where one might live, but its importance in the urban environment, which tends to be noisy and chaotic, cannot be stressed enough. Oftentimes, urban parks and gardens are places where we go to seek out the soothing tranquillity of nature and a distraction from the hectic urban buzz. In the study on the first version of CLM, Character of
Peace and Silence in the eyes of experts was almost perfectly (90%) correlated with the total contemplative score of a given landscape (Olszewska et al., 2016). Also in the further study, this particular category was the most strongly correlated with low brainwave frequency and positive emotions (Olszewska-Guizzo et al., 2022b) compared to the rest of the CLM features. Character of Peace and Silence captures the calming dimension of contemplative experience (see Chapter 2, Figure 1.2), which is compatible with a sense of relaxation, tranquillity, serenity, sense of safety, distraction from everyday problems, familiarity, and inner silence induced by nature experience (known for instance from ART) as well as the non-threatening character of exposure (emphasized by the biophilia hypothesis). All this means that the creation of landscapes for contemplation, specifically in cities, should start from creating a character of peace and silence, as it is the pilar of all contemplative experience that will happen in that place.

4.1 REORIENTATION
One rather intangible attribute of the contemplative landscape is the sense of reorientation that it provides to the visitor, by building the immediate contrast between the urban and natural landscape. This includes emphasizing contrast to the urban shapes and forms, but also to the chaos and banality of everyday life. Reorientation through the landscape, in a psychological sense, can be described as:
“orienting the individual within a bigger order, . . . generating narrative that is a reference to fundamental human life situations that resonate universally . . . offering silence and a feeling of being removed from the world, eventually eliciting empathy for others and reflection on one’s own.”
(Hermann, 2005, p. 59)
The reorienting space would then be any space that is different from the everyday-life context of the region/city in which it is located, providing visitors with different views, activities, pace, and overall perception from what they are used to experiencing every day. This directly links back to the previously mentioned concept of “being away” – a part of attention restoration theory. Contemplation-induced reorientation can be achieved in the physical space, for example, by introducing an enclosure or visual distinction from the city (see Figure 4.1). This would be, among other design strategies, one of the most basic ways to reorient people from their urban living context.
Figure 4.1 The urban green space provides reorientation as it is distinctly physically and visually divided from the busy urban life. Botanic Gardens Sydney, Australia.

4.2 REST AND RELAXATION
Another psychological attribute that seems to contribute to the contemplative experience of the landscape is a design that invites rest and relaxation. Comfort is probably one of the features most connected to this aspect, thus contemplative spaces cannot occur without a visitor feeling comfortable and welcome there. Design strategies to induce this particular aspect of contemplative space would include something rather obvious – introducing comfortable seating areas or benches that are well maintained and where one can feel welcome to sit and relax for as much time as they please (see Figure 4.2). Unfortunately, not every seating area invites rest and relaxation. The contemporary street artist Banksy made an interesting and sarcastic comment on that. Through his art he pointed out several failures of our civilization, including the seating areas in public places, which do not provide a sense of comfort but instead:
(1) Have narrow and slopey seats – bodyweight remains on feet discouraging long seating, prevents from leaning back, stops objects resting on it; some feature a pivot, tipping users to ground if relaxing too heavily.
(2) Are made of steel – cold in winter, hot in summer, slippery and buttock-numbing, discourages long sitting.
(3) Armrest dividers – blocks lying across bench by homeless or tired people. Meet front of bench to block skateboarders.
(Banksy, 2014)
Figure 4.2 Comfortable outdoor seating that can be moved by the visitor according to needs; Beguinevest, Bruges, Belgium.

Landscape architects should be extra alert to these anti-examples in urban green space design, especially when they have contemplative experiences in mind. Research shows that incorporating interactive landscape design can be a way to improve the feeling of rest and relaxation in space (Astbury, 2013;Kershaw et al., 2017; Souter-Brown et al., 2021). Being able to move and adjust the seating position or use the outdoor exercise equipment feels like being part of the design process and creation of the forthcoming experience.
Environmental psychology points to the familiarity with the place as opposed to the first-time visiting as a potential contributor to a richer and more profound restorative experience and thus mental health benefits (Ouellette et al., 2005). Familiar places for rest and relaxation are those that welcome frequent and regular use by the same visitors, likely members of the local community. These could, for example, be walking paths that are adequate in length to provide a daily nature contemplation experience and can be easily incorporated in a daily schedule and contribute to a self-care practice. Feeling comfort in a particular place in your neighborhood might require long-term bottom-up building of the sense of belonging and sense of place by the local community. To this end, community participation in the process of building the contemplative landscapes can deepen people’s sense of familiarity and attachment to the place, making it more friendly and welcoming (Hidalgo & Hernandez, 2001). Here, all sorts of participatory approaches, including co-design, will be important and will surely contribute to more people feeling welcome and familiar to a given space.
For one time or less frequent visitors, it is also possible to provide a welcoming and cozy environment that seems familiar, native, easy to navigate, and similar to many places where they may have already been. This ties in with the matter of equity and inclusivity, without which there would be no sense of comfort and inviting to rest and relax in urban green spaces. Clearly, all city residents and users should feel welcome in the green space, regardless of their gender, age, ethnicity, level of disability and so forth. Golf courses are an example of green spaces with high contemplative potential, but they are not easily accessible – they provide a restorative experience mostly to members and staff (en k Staats, 2012). Creating places for contemplation in cities should be equally inclusive and leverage features such as archetypal elements, which serve as landmarks to facilitate orientation and wayfinding (especially beneficial for frail individuals with ailments such as dementia), while providing easy access for wheelchairs and strollers. In a recent book envisioning the perfect restorative city, the authors emphasize the inclusivity of green spaces as one of seven aspects contributing to restorativeness in a neighborhood as well as at the city level. They also mention several immediate ways designers could improve the level of inclusivity of their urban public spaces, for example: making sure there are accessible toilets within the site, introducing an autism-friendly design with low stimulation and low-intensity colors and also, in cities facing the issue of homelessness, ensuring access to places where homeless people can sleep within parks (Roe & McCay, 2021).
4.3 SILENCE AND SOLITUDE
If one understands solitude as being alone or lonely, it automatically connotates negative emotions. As social beings, humans have for centuries cared for the development of interpersonal relations, joined groups, identified with nations, and coexisted as members of classes, castes, subcultures, and collectives. Humans tend to be afraid of living alone through old age and dying alone. Fear of loneliness often takes a morbid form or leads to toxic co-dependencies, substance abuse, and psychological dependence on third parties. Simultaneously, the entire depth of existence is manifested through solitude. Only someone who understands loneliness can be truly open to the world and, as a result, truly social. We come into the world alone and throughout life we gather experiences and social bonds – and then leave this world alone with the baggage of our own experiences.
In the crowded, urban environment, loneliness takes on a completely new meaning. Overcrowded places characterized in cities have been proven to contribute to psychological stress (Berry, 2007; Tost et al.,2015) and alienation – one can feel even more lonely while being in a crowd. At the same time, public outdoor places in cities may seem quite a luxury. But, as contemplation goes hand in hand with solitude, being alone and free from other people´s influences is essential for the free flow of thoughts. Companions of the contemplative walk might disturb pondering and reflecting. Hermann, in the description of the Stockholm Woodland Cemetery, writes about solitude: 
“One can experience solitude walking through the grounds as a silent observer, able to stop anywhere, any time. Even when surrounded by others, one may still feel free to follow one´s own thoughts and feelings as if alone.”
(Hermann, 2005, p. 63)
Spaces of silence and a respectful character, such as cemeteries, are clearly places where one can sense solitude, but how to create this character in a public park or garden? The most likely method would be by targeted zoning and programming of the areas of intervention and dividing spaces of entertainment from those of passive activity and contemplation. These places should not be isolated from crowds, but be designed in a way so one can feel distance from others without feeling anxious or worried. Urban parks and gardens seem to play a role of refuge from the crowd. A sense of solitude is directly related to tranquility. The phenomenon of a landscape’s tranquility was studied and described by Herzog and Barnes at Grand Valley State University in USA (Herzog & Barnes, 1999). They established that the level of tranquility (calmness, serenity, peacefulness) – one of the major components of the attention restoration theory of the Kaplans – is correlated with the types of spatial composition, and is more pronounced in field/forest landscapes as well as in large waterscapes, as compared to unstructured openness, present for example in the desert landscape (Herzog & Barnes, 1999). This suggests that people would feel their calmest in environments with an open view, but while still being in control of their surroundings (for instance, knowing that nobody will suddenly approach and threaten them).
The construct of tranquility was also studied by researchers from England, who came up with the Tranquility Rating Prediction Tool, or TRAPT (Pheasant et al., 2010). According to this tool, the tranquility of a landscape is positively correlated with two environmental factors: the auditory noise level and the quantity of natural features (flora, fauna, stone walls, and water, but not sky). 
Following the concept of tranquility and active mitigation of urban noise from green spaces, designers could employ some of the more or less known strategies. First, using dense vegetation screening is known for noise reduction with its general efficacy in reflecting, diffracting, and refracting of sound waves (Fang & Ling, 2005). However, depending on the vegetation species, height, distribution, and noise absorption qualities, the effect of noise reduction may vary (Bucur, 2007; Nilsson et al., 2013). It is considered that for traffic noise a buffer of a minimum 15m wide and 2–4m high, filled with multi-layered vegetation, characterized by the structural complexity and dense foliage will be most effective in dispersing the concentrated noise (Van Renterghem et al., 2015). Soil and topography change are even better noise barriers than plants, so it is another reason why designers might be interested in creating spaces with natural, undulating landforms (Tan, 2018) (also see Chapter 7, “Landform”). Besides physical noise barriers, there are also interesting psychological ones, for example “visual masking”: we perceive noise pollution as less disturbing when we do not see the source of it (cars driving by, for example) (Van Renterghem, 2019) or “auditory masking” – where one sound (the masker, for example, a water feature) is used to reduce the impact of another sound (the target, for example, traffic noise) (Galbrun & Ali, 2013). The masking sound can be either louder than the target, rendering it inaudible, but not necessarily; both sounds can be audible, but because of the attention focus, proximity, and visibility of the masker sound source, the noise pollution will be much less noticeable (Benfield et al., 2010; Brawn, 1994).

4.4 SAFETY AND NO TECHNOLOGY
The safety of urban parks and gardens is an aspect that often gets forgotten when discussing the health and well-being effects of public spaces. At the same time, it is clear that urban green spaces perceived as unsafe or having a bad reputation discourage many potential site visitors from using and enjoying them. Green spaces in some cities are associated with more crime and substance use, and they are closed at nighttime. In others, visitors can encounter disturbing social phenomena such as “cat-calling”, trashing, and public urination, among other behaviors that make the walk through the park (especially a lonely walk) quite an unsettling experience. Research shows that woman are more likely than men to fear crime in urban public spaces such as parks, and that fear influences their choice as to whether to use these spaces or not (Snedker, 2015). Safety of the urban parks and gardens is therefore a critical prerequisite to unlock virtually any benefits that the green spaces have to offer. Without safety, they become a dis-amenity that only exacerbates the possible fear and anxiety in the communities (Williams et al., 2020). Overall, it is an issue of management and maintenance of the space, and depends largely on the local authorities and task forces responsible for that aspect in the city. Nevertheless, research shows that perceived safety is highly related to the visual quality and aesthetics of the parks and gardens, suggesting that landscape architects and designers also have an important role to play here (Mambretti, 2011; Schroeder & Anderson, 1984).
Creating a prospect is a way to improve perceived safety. In one study, the presence of panoramic views (El-Metwally et al., 2021) and high visibility (Schroeder & Anderson, 1984) were associated with the highest perceived safety compared to other landscape composition types. This is not surprising, having the prospect-refuge theory in mind, and considering the thousands of years of evolution leading humans to prefer savannahlike environments where one could look afar to monitor threats from a greater distance (Appleton, 1996). Following that note, avoiding any elements that may cause entrapment (barriers blocking the escape) or concealment (blocked views) would also benefit the perceived safety of urban green spaces (Mambretti, 2011). In the popular Natural Environment Scoring Tool (NEST, Gidlow et al., 2018) the safety domain was represented by the level of Incivilities (general litter, evidence of alcohol or drug use, graffiti, broken glass, vandalism, dog mess, excessive/unpleasant noise (e.g., traffic, industry), and smells (e.g., traffic, local industry). Urban green space designers should address ways to decrease these phenomena through the inclusion of more trash cans, dog litter boxes, and site-specific considerations. Interestingly, the presence of lighting and the visibility of surrounding roads and houses from inside the park suggested by the earlier framework (Broomhall et al., 2004) were intentionally omitted for the development of NEST “as they were not congruent or deemed to provide a reliable indicator of safety” (Gidlow et al., 2018), which seems rather dubious and highlights the inconsistencies in research methodologies and approaches, highlighting the need for more research in this area.
The campus-wide program “Contemplation by Design – The Power of the Pause”, initiated at Stanford University attempts to incorporate contemplation and mindfulness into the daily lives of all members of the academic community for a more mind-friendly work environment. In their framework for designing a Contemplative Center (so called Windhover), Benjamin Chrisinger and Tia Rich point out the importance of quiet and warm places with no technology or any available wireless internet connections (Chrisinger & Rich, 2020). Some of the feedback of student-participants of their study and particularly, the statement on a tech-free zone included the following statements:
“Having a place I can go; a dedicated no tech space is fantastic because every other place today is a technology zone. When I do contemplative practices like yoga or meditation I tune in to what’s inside, instead of focusing what is going on around me, on the deliverables on my to do list. Technology pulls me out, to my to dos, to social media post about what other people are busy doing.”
“At the Contemplative Center there are no phones. You get to see the human head free of that appendage! I almost never see that anywhere. Somehow, I actually feel more connected to them when there is no phone next to their head, even though we don’t say a word to each other.”
Changing perspective, reorienting from the buzz of the workplace as well as feeling a deeper connection with other individuals might be some of the precious benefits of having no technology in any space of contemplation. Urban parks and gardens, however, seem to pursue a different vision to incorporate more technology solutions, which include more sensors, internet access sites, and monitoring systems. For example, the European Horizon 2020 call for “Visionary and integrated solutions to improve well-being and health in cities” with a total budget of 43 million euros, specifically called for and awarded four international proposals in which there would be incorporated in the public green spaces “networks of sensors, GIS-mapping, big data, observational programmes, and citizens’ observatories . . . to enable the integration and visualisation of data for more effective monitoring of the transition towards healthier and happier cities” (https://cordis.europa.eu/programme/id/H2020_SC5-142019). Also, the new vision for Singapore “City in Nature” considers leveraging the Internet of Things with widespread sensors distributed across the urban green spaces for continuous monitoring and data collection (Koh et al., 2022). These approaches might contribute to more safety and a better understanding of green space functioning, including their impact on mental health, but at the same time, the mere existence of dense technology networks in urban parks and gardens might not align well with the individual contemplative experience.

Figure 4.3 The Windhover Contemplative Center at Stanford University Campus is
a quiet place offering students and employees peace and silence away
from technology.

Box 4.1 Neuropsychological parameters of Character of Peace and Silence
Figure 4.4 Proportional area charts illustrating the extent to which the Character of Peace and Silence component contributes to the positive neuropsychological outcomes of urban park users. Results are based on the correlation of expert CLM scoring, EEG scores, and self-reported mood scores acquired from the research studies in urban parks. Source: Olszewska-Guizzo et al. (2022, 2023).

The Character of Peace and Silence of the landscape scene throughout the analyses showed a key importance for the contemplativeness of a scene. It was placed as the second contributing component to the overall mental health and well-being scores as per neuropsychological studies (Olszewska-Guizzo et al., 2022, 2023, see Figure 4.4), with an estimated 18% contribution to the overall positive brain imaging and mood self-reporting measurement.
Out of these measures, it appears that some of the benefits from Character of Peace and Silence in the landscape are transferred subconsciously, and mostly affect the wakeful relaxation mechanisms (17%, third rank), marked with frontal Alpha oscillations. The scores for this feature contributes to the mindfulness response slightly less (in 16%, third rank). Moreover, Character of Peace and Silence is of primary importance for the design targeting self-reported (subjective) good mood (19%, first rank). This suggests the highest level of consideration of this very CLM component in the landscape design process.


Scoring of Character of Peace and Silence dimension

I Look at the landscape 
II Consider these questions 
- Is there a visual or physical division between the green space and busy urban space? 
- Are there lots of cars or people in the scene? 
- Are there any comfortable seating areas that invite visitors to rest? 
- What are the (potential) noise sources? Are they 
mostly artificial or natural? 
- Does the space feel intimate and secure? 
- Are there any tech-infrastructures visible such as wires, pipes, or antennas? 
III Give your score 
5 or 6 points: If there is an explicit character of peace and silence in the scene, and it highly contrasts with the urban environment. The space seems accessible, secure, and with no technology. It invites visitors to rest and relax and gives a sense of solitude. 
3 or 4 points: If there is a moderate character of peace and silence, sense of solitude, and/or there is less contrast with urban environment.
1 or 2 points: If there is no character of peace and silence, the space seems busy and there is no contrast with the urban environment. 
