Color and Light
Color and Light are two non-spatial, highly interconnected features of any landscape and vehicles of ephemeral content constituting an integral component of contemplative landscapes. Light is a fundamental property of any visual stimulation; without light we simply wouldn’t be able to see anything, including any color. Color is “locked” within the intrinsic properties of the object, but above all it depends on the illumination falling on it, so that “there is no object so foul that intense light will not make beautiful” (Emerson, 2009, p. 9). Color theory and aesthetics in visual arts is quite a discipline in itself and only some basic principles of it will be discussed in this chapter.
Color is defined as one of the basic elements of a visual pattern, a property of reflecting light of a particular wavelength, and a perceptual sensation arising from the activity of the retina of the eye and its associated nerve systems (Smardon et al., 1986). According to the timehonored Encyclopedia of the Arts (Runes & Schrickel, 1947) color is characterized by five main properties:
• chroma – purity of a color, or its freedom from white to grey,
• hue – classification of colors from reddish or yellowish (warm palette) to greenish, bluish, or purplish (cool palette),
• saturation – the measure of the actual color content in a given sensation,
• tint – any color tone which has more or less brilliance,
• value – relative lightness or darkness of a color.
Interestingly, the color perception and interpretation done by our brains are determined by individual perceptual capabilities, and we are unable to tell if what one sees as blue is blue to others too. Following this logic, we do not know what the “true” blue color is. Still, during upbringing, we learned what color we should name blue, and this is how we will interpret it throughout our lives.
Noteworthy, there is no scientific consensus about the preference of colors in humans, and studies at different geographic locations suggest there may be different patterns of preference in various locations (Kaufman & Lohr, 2002), likely determined by cultural factors. However, as previously highlighted in this book, preference does not directly moderate the mental health and well-being outcomes (what we prefer is not always good for our health). To better interpret the contents of this chapter, it should then be considered that the personal or collective preference of color palettes are not relevant for mental health and wellbeing, nor for contemplative landscape design.

9.1 CALM COLOR PALETTE
According to CLM the most contemplative colors in a landscape scene are of a warm hue and low saturation. They should be broken (diluted by other colors, not clear), and not too contrasting with one another. In other words, they can be called colors of nature, and they are known to have the power to create the feeling of intimacy and solitude (Hermann, 2005). Among them, the soothing and calming green, as the primary color of nature with all its calm shades, should be the base of contemplative design. An interesting example of the contemplative design featuring only shades of green is the Reflection Garden at the Bloedel Reserve in Seattle:
“The Reflection Garden provides a potent meditation on the color green. The pool is the darkest of greens, almost black, from the vantage point of the bench. As you move closer to the pool edge, the sky and its colors begin to vividly tint the color of the pool. . . . Being surrounded by a vivid chartreuse lawn, juxtaposed with a green-black pool, and enveloped by every other shade of green in the hedge and forest was a very unusual and memorable experience.”
(Krinke, 2005, p. 123)
The colors of natural ecosystems, unlike horticultural arrangements and flowerbeds, have a more harmonious and limited palette. According to F.L. Olmsted, the restorative power of landscape design cannot be achieved by neither specimen planting nor spots of brightly colored flowers (F.L. Olmsted (?) Beveridge & Rocheleau, 1995, p. 36). Highly saturated colors, popping up and dominating the setting, trigger our attention towards them and possibly disturb contemplation:
“Japanese Garden, and the Rhododendron Glen . . . these two spaces contained many different plants, textures and colors, and I found it myself more distracted than relaxed.”
(Krinke, 2005, p. 122)
Such pops of color in fact do not appear in natural environments very often. In Figure 9.1 some of the colors of nature from various habitats are extracted from photos to show that natural settings have mostly calm colors. Some emerging evidence from psychophysiological research further suggests that warm colors in the landscape may benefit the restorative potential of nature exposure. However, the sensitivity to colors of the landscapes may be determined by geographic location, quite likely to where we grew up. A study comparing groups from the UK and USA found that American participants showed more beneficial well-being outcomes (lower heart-rate variability and galvanic skin response) from exposure to warm landscape colors compared to their British counterparts, who did not show significant differences in response between cool and warm tones of the nature they were exposed to (Neale et al., 2021).
Figure 9.1 Colors of nature are usually less saturated. If there are some strong contrasting ones, they are in the minority and there are not very many in actual natural ecosystems.
An interesting example of this is present in the Standard Environmental Color Paint Tool developed by the US Bureau of Land Management. It consists of nine colors that best represent the colors found in western landscapes. They include: Carlsbad Canyon, Covert Green, Shadow Gray, Juniper Green, Shale Green, Sudan Brown, Beetle, Yuma Green and Carob Brown (Bureau of Land Management, 2015). The purpose of this tool is to camouflage buildings and infrastructure objects in the scene to preserve the scenic values of landscapes. However, the palette itself can be used for many purposes, also as an inspiration for landscape architecture designs.
Clearly the landscape colors depend on multiple factors such as geographical location, meteorological conditions, season, time of day and so forth. Aware of those factors, landscape architects can still opt for more natural colors for the plants and materials they utilize in their contemplative designs.

9.2 LIVELY PLAY OF LIGHT AND SHADOW
The visibility of shade movements along the daily cycle, or the passage of the sun and moon over the horizon, as well as colorful light glares, rainbows, flickers and reflections stimulate the contemplative experiences connected with the intangible, ephemeral aspect of nature and the transcendence of time. 
“a subtle mechanism for registering the passage of time via constantly moving shadows . . . receiving, reflecting, registering it and casting shadows – making one acutely aware of the passage of time and its cyclical nature.”
(Hermann, 2005, p. 46)
These very subtle changes are in their nature very symbolic, making us ponder on our own existence, the passing of time, and what is truly important. Realizing the cyclical character of natural phenomena might also be an unconscious and, therefore, an archetypal message (Grahn et al., 2021).
“The motion of the earth round its axis and round the sun, makes the day and the year. . . . But is there no intent of an analogy between man’s life and the seasons? And do the seasons gain no grandeur or pathos from that analogy?”
(Emerson, 2009, p. 18)
Seasonal and daily cycles overlap with the cycles of generations and eras, which can be called the time arresting effect. The seasonal cycles in space design can be manifested with the seasonality of vegetation and its naturally changing colors. Such techniques were highly emphasized in early-Japanese Zen gardens to induce contemplation and transcendence of time (Treib, 2005). An added effect of light and shade can be observed when sunlight is cast through the tree canopy onto the ground, creating a continuous game of light and shadow. It enlivens the landscape through its constant changing, and make us feel a part of living nature (Figure 9.2). Given that some plants move more than the others (for example, the leaves of Alnus glutinosa tremble with the smallest blow of wind), landscape architects can amplify this effect by adjusting their planting plans accordingly.
Sky, cloud, or star-gazing is gaining popularity as a passive recreation activity that induces contemplation and is relatively easy to be introduced in urban green spaces. Spaces like that should have skywards oriented design and provide comfortable seats or lay-down benches and exposure to the open sky. On the other hand, the zones where the visitor is supposed to stop for a while to experience the landscape contemplation should be located in shaded areas, where colors automatically appear less contrasting, and where the observer is not exposed to direct sunshine, for shade invites rest and relaxation while also creating a character of intimacy (Hermann, 2005). Introducing a larger shaded zone or sheltered area in the green space reduces stimuli by “dampening the senses” (Treib, 2005, p. 28).
Figure 9.2 A moving shadow cast from the setting sun filtered through the tree trunks and branches. Château d’Yquem Garden, Sauternes, France.

Figure 9.3 Glass buildings can reflect sunlight to create additional visual interest and light phenomena in the landscape scene, Parque Leopold, Brussels, Belgium.

Figure 9.4 Shadow cast on a park lawn marks cooler zones for visitors to rest, and they move throughout the day (a) Alexandra Palace Gardens, London UK, (b) Parchi di Nervi, Genova, Italy. Source: Photo (b) by Agnieszka Chadała.

Box 9.2 Neuropsychological parameters of Color and Light
Figure 9.5 Proportional area charts illustrating the extent to which the Color and Light component contributes to the positive neuropsychological outcomes of the urban park users. Results are based on the correlation of expert CLM scoring, EEG scores, and self-reported mood scores acquired from the research studies in urban parks. Hatched fields denote non-significant associations. Source: Olszewska-Guizzo et al. (2022, 2023).
Color and Light aspects of the landscape, discussed in this chapter, were ranked fifth in contribution to the overall mental health and well-being scores as per neuropsychological studies (OlszewskaGuizzo et al., 2022, 2023, see Figure 9.5), with an estimated 13% contribution to the overall positive brain imaging and mood self-reports measurement.
Out of these measures it seems that the benefits from Color and Light in the landscape are transferred both subconsciously, contributing to the mindfulness response marked with frontal Theta oscillations (in 12%, fifth rank), and consciously marked by the selfreported good mood (12%, fifth rank). The association of the Color and Light component with Alpha oscillations was not significant, so it is not clear whether it contributes to wakeful relaxation. Therefore, in designing for mindfulness experience, Color and Light of the landscape elements should be taken under consideration by the designer, but generally, there will be other aspects to consider first.


Scoring of Color & Light dimension:
I Look at the landscape 
II Consider these questions 
- Are there a lot of bright and contrasting colors in the scene? 
- Are there any posters, billboards, or colorful road signage present? 
- Do the equipment and built structures have natural colors? 
- What is the weather like? 
- Would there be shade over the observer's head if it was a sunny day? 
- Would the shadows be visible on the ground during a sunny day? 

III Give your score 
5 or 6 points: If the color palette is harmonious and natural, broken or warm colors are dominating, and light and shade movement can be seen. 
3 or 4 points: If there is a moderate amount of contrasting bright colors and moderate amount of light and shade. 
1 or 2 points: If there are lots of vivid, contrasting colors and light and shade is not visible with any weather conditions. 