Compatibility

Compatibility is one of the basic principles not only in landscape architecture but also in visual arts and spatial planning. All artists and designers should master the skill of creating harmonious and adjacent spaces and forms, which requires plenty of formal education and natural talent to excel in these areas. Compatibility in landscape design refers to a degree to which elements and features present within the view are unified with their setting (Smardon et al., 1984). In the contemplative
landscape design at the urban green space scale, there are several aspects of compatibility of the scene discussed below.

5.1 HARMONY AND SPATIAL ORDER
Creating harmony/balance and spatial order are ancient practices as old as human civilization itself, and are central to good landscape design. This requires organizing the elements in space in such a way as to create a pleasing unity – a unified whole that stimulates aesthetic satisfaction.
In contemplative landscape design, with its focus on the visual quality of a scene, the horizontal and vertical balance can be distinguished. The horizontal balance is about the distribution of the apparent weight of the elements, so that the view does not appear to be heavier on one side and lighter on the other. The way to achieve a perfect horizontal balance is to make both sides of the view mirror each other or, in other words, create a symmetrical balance. This can be easy to find in geometrical man-made gardens, such as French baroque gardens, but is not so apparent in landscapes created by nature. In natural environments, which should serve as an inspiration for contemplative man-made landscapes, an asymmetrical balance appears to be a more adequate tool, but it is a little bit more difficult to secure for a designer. In this case, careful rearrangement of the visual weight of the designed objects is necessary. The objects need to be tweaked and adjusted until the whole view is balanced (Zelanski & Fisher, 1996). Vertical harmony refers to balancing out the upper and lower parts of the scene. In this case, perfect symmetry can be rather confusing to the eye, and the mirror rule no longer applies. Considering the benefits of looking up towards the sky, which will be discussed in Chapters 6 and 7, and given that a contemplative landscape is based on skyward oriented design, the vertical balance should also contribute to creating this effect by organizing landscape objects so that the visual attention is driven upwards. How the openings and closings of the views are laid out by a landscape architect determines the correct horizontal balance. Simultaneously, the scales and proportions of the objects must be worked out well and have the proper visual relationship with each other.
Figure 5.1 Example of high compatibility through harmonious and adjacent landscape design, as opposed to low compatibility.

Spatial order and absence of distracting stimuli in the space we are exposed to is key for creating an inner silence and redirecting one’s thoughts from the outside in (Hermann, 2005; Krinke, 2005; Tuan,
1990). With the overload of information and overstimulation that urban living provides us with every day, simplification and reduction of distracting stimuli and/or information provided by the space are some of the main principles of the Compatibility element of contemplative landscape design. Simplification of shapes and forms is one way to decrease spatial chaos. Also known as economy of the design, it is a rule according to which there is only what is needed without anything that could
potentially distract attention from the essence of an idea. In contemplative landscape design:
“simplification signals contemplation because the story is rendered less obvious, it gives a respite from ‘visual clutter’ with a limited color/material palette and a reductive design vocabulary.”
(Treib, 2005, p. 22)
In the case of natural simplification, it means a feeling of order and balance with a lack of disturbing objects or overwhelming information and stimuli in the space. In simple spaces we tend to feel good, as they provoke creative thought by reducing the impact of external stimuli.
This demands compensation by the individual seeking knowledge, tranquility, and lightening of mood. The less there is to catch our attention, the more of ourselves we have to bring to the space, to give it meaning –therefore, meaning depends on us. Complexity might be more attractive and engaging, but for the contemplative experience, the best spaces would be those simple ones, where our thoughts can flow freely without focusing on a certain element and without having to wonder about what the artist meant. Attractiveness and contemplative values do not always go hand in hand!
The reduction of sensory stimulation and the creation of empty spaces are other ways to mitigate sensory overstimulation through space design. During everyday life we tend to perform repetitive tasks and routines, which require certain types of sensory stimulation. Office work on the PC, for example, will involve mostly visual cues, while work in an orchestra mostly auditory stimulation. Rarely does our daily occupation involve all five senses. In contemplative landscape design, it is recommended to reduce and shift the sensory stimulation from what we usually experience in a day to the stimuli that can be experienced in nature, gently activating all our senses. The opposite of this would be complete sensory deprivation, which is actually quite difficult to experience. It is arguably limited to sound-proof, light-proof tanks, where one can float in salty water at a temperature identical to the skin temperature. This is quite a remarkable experience, and part of so-called floatation therapy, which can help to achieve a deep relaxation state (Feinstein et al., 2018).
In the context of reducing the sensory cues of overcrowded and overstimulated urban environments, considering the emptiness in terms of order is an important point in designing a contemplative landscape. Emptiness is a state of space thanks to which any organization, shape, and form can arise. Designing a landscape with non-intrusive, easy-toprocess elements of nature gives space for mental restoration, replenishment, and reorganization of what might be bothering someone. The tendency to individualize relaxation leads to higher demand for solitude and, therefore, reduced design vocabulary in spaces for mental respite. This goes hand in hand with the solitary contemplation of space that is not overly tended by human influence: “in the era of the urbanized world, more and more people choose forests and wilderness as places of rest and recreation” (Bell et al., 2009).
Due to the fact that congestion is one of the main problems of modern cities, it is unlikely that there will be an excessive space of emptiness. Quite the opposite – the spaces of absence, with nature taking a lead in the context of our cities seem more and more a luxury. Being in this type of space gives us the opportunity to contemplate and distance ourselves from what awaits us after returning home, to our city, to everyday life.
There are a number of strategies for reductionist design for contemplative landscapes, which are primarily based on reinforcing the contrast between the form and its lack, and an empathy with the open space and the natural environment. Strategies such as compression of elements (grouping, stacking, distancing), hiding or immersing objects into natural structures (e.g. underground/ underwater), using mirror effects or transparency to hide objects, introducing temporary (pop-up) elements and programs, and using dematerialized, ephemeral structures (such as light, air movement, etc.) instead of solid ones, are just some examples of strategies for more decluttered, that is, more contemplative, urban spaces (Figure 5.2). These strategies can be applied to green spaces but also other public spaces too, as well as to any individual details and components of the space.
The rule of reduction in contemplative landscapes would also apply to the programming of activities in the green space. Contemplation oriented spaces are traditionally defined by silence, remoteness, and simplicity. Because in contemplation we aim to direct the visitor’s attention inwards, allowing the thought process to be more open and free, the space should be passive or even “void of programmed activity” (Pasowicz, 2021).
Figure 5.2 Reduction and emptiness – design strategies for reduction of overstimulation and creating more spaces of emptiness in cities.

5.2 BALANCE BETWEEN WILD AND TAMED
Besides balancing out the components of the view in terms of scale, proportions, position, and the level of visual interest they capture, in terms of urban landscape design, it is very important to keep the harmony between man-made and natural objects. On one hand, landscape architects want to introduce as much nature in its purest shape as possible into the cities, but, on the other hand, too much nature can be counterproductive in terms of creating safe and serene spaces for mental health promotion. We want people to be outside their comfort zone, experiencing some of the wild, untamed aspects of nature, but we do not want them to feel insecure, lost, or anxious.
Here, the biophilia hypothesis might become a bit confusing, because if we all innately love everything that’s natural (or life-like following the formal biophilia definition), then there should be no problem in introducing natural places that are as wild as possible into the cities. In fact, forms inspired by nature are very familiar to our brain, but mere familiarity with some phenomena does not warrant positive health outcomes. Our evolution has made us adapt to spaces where the wilderness is under control, delivered in doses (so called “wilderness experience”) or moderated and maintained, similar to natural reserves, parks, and urban gardens. For example, urban forests  showing recent human intervention (piled up logs, low amount of dead wood) induced better well-being and affective outcomes than a wild forest, which had not been touched for over six years (however, in the study even the wild forest has a walkable and comfortable path – a sign of human intervention) (Martens et al., 2011). Research on landscape preference has also shown that people prefer scenes with ‘tamed nature’ over ‘wild nature’, where human intervention such as mown grass, boardwalks, and bridges were present (Kaplan et al., 1998). Therefore, biophobia – the concept integrated into the biophilia hypothesis – is real and cannot be neglected.
 
Figure 5.3 Balance between built and natural: a view from Henderson Waves bridge towards “Reflections at Keppel Bay” residential complex, Singapore. The focus of the view is on the futuristic building with skyscraping towers, but from this perspective it is immersed in nature – a lush and dense rainforest and a faraway view of the straits.


5.3 INWARD SPACE ORIENTATION
Contemplative space usually has a center of attention on a “focal” point, which is accompanied by a “panoramic” quality (Moir, 1978). Elements that are oriented in a hierarchical way around that center – an inward orientation of the space – can also induce self-reflection – an inward orientation of one’s attention and character of sanctuary and a silent oasis.
The easiest way to achieve inward space orientation is by working with the relatively small scale of a garden. Enclosed, inward-oriented spaces or garden rooms have been created for thousands of years in both the East and West for the same basic reasons – protection, intimacy, and contemplation (Krinke, 2005). Cloister gardens from the Middle Ages are an example of such spaces, serving as the monastery’s central open space and as a symbolic area for contemplation. Also, Japanese Zen gardens have a similar composition to garden rooms, where in peace and intimacy one could give him or herself over to meditation. More contemporary examples include so-called pocket parks or pocket gardens, especially popular in densely urbanized areas, where space for a green refuge is limited.
The inward composition of space can also present itself through the connectivity of a clear path or signage system. These elements, located in a hierarchical relation to each other, are considered to be one of the design strategies for evoking memories, eliciting recognition, and inducing contemplation (Hermann, 2005, p. 61).
A clear signage system is also very important for avoiding the feeling of being lost in space. In fact, it is hard to imagine anyone contemplating nature while being stressed about finding a way back home.
“Being lost can be terrifying. Fears of getting lost can contribute to people’s decisions to avoid unfamiliar natural settings. By contrast, feeling reassured that one will be able to find one’s way can increase the quality and potential benefits of nature experiences.”
(Kaplan et al., 1998, p. 39)

5.4 ARTISTIC EXPRESSION
This part may come across as slightly controversial, because it discusses the features that turned out not to contribute to the contemplativeness score of the landscape in the reliability testing exercise, which are the strategies of Artistic Expression (for example, historic and ideological universalism, abstraction, repetition, and hyperbole). They were initially introduced to the CLM, but a study on the reliability, conducted with independent experts in landscape architecture, showed that the contribution of Artistic Expression to the overall CLM score was negligible, diminishing the overall internal consistency score of the CLM tool (Olszewska et al., 2016). It may be that Artistic Expression had less to do with the overall scene perception in general as compared with other aspects of the scene, such as Character of Peace and Silence. And that the level of its importance is rather low to the construct of contemplativeness, that, if preserved in the CLM, it would deteriorate its overall quality.
This finding could be considered surprising, because the contemplation of nature has often been compared to the contemplation of art. Also, art pieces are typically considered to be an important factor in improving the quality of public space. Nevertheless, already in the writings of Immanuel Kant, we can see the emergent distinction in value between the creation of an artist and nature. He considered a difference between the pictorial art (e.g., painting) and art of garden design: “the former gives only the illusion of corporal extension; the latter certainly gives this in truth but gives only the illusion of employment and use for end other than merely the play of the imagination in the viewing of its forms”(Kant, 2000, p. 200). He further explains that the art of gardening “is nothing other than the decoration of the ground with the same variety (grasses, flowers, bushes and trees, even water, hills and valleys) with which nature presents it to intuition, only arranged differently and suited to certain ideas” (Kant, 2000, pp. 200–201). Following on that, introducing too much of a landscape and garden art into already fragmented and highly transformed cities, is also considered further space colonization by human intervention. Prof. Janusz Skalski from Warsaw University of Life Sciences argues that urban green space cannot be treated as a work or art, which he calls essentially dead works. This is because:
“the entire physiognomic spatial game, which results from the different light and shade on the day scale and the variability of the seasons, is created by nature. It seems that with such creative involvement of nature, the role of designer comes down to not spoiling what is natural. His work cannot be treated as a painting of a nature which, by right, is only judged visually. And yet, we can only evaluate the aesthetic and functional value of a garden as a time-space creation when we experience it with all senses.”
(Skalski, 2010, p. 38)
He further draws a clear emphasis on the landscape belonging more to the garden or construction exhibitions, rather than for people’s use.
It may then be more reasonable to distinguish natural and artistic contemplation as two separate concepts. Contemplation of art versus contemplation of the landscape and nature and its phenomena can in fact be two separate things leading to different psychological outcomes, although more studies are needed to confidently explain this separation.
Box 5.2 Neuropsychological parameters of Compatibility
Figure 5.4 Proportional area charts illustrating the extent to which the Compatibility component contributes to the positive neuropsychological outcomes of urban park users. Results are based on the correlation of expert CLM scoring, EEG scores, and self reported mood scores acquired from the research studies in urban parks. Hatched fields denote non-significant associations. Source: Olszewska-Guizzo et al. (2022, 2023).
The Compatibility of the landscape scene throughout the analyses showed a lesser contribution to the overall contemplativeness of a scene, when compared to the other CLM categories. It was placed at the last of seven places in the ranking of contribution to the overall mental health and well-being scores as per neuropsychological studies (Olszewska-Guizzo et al., 2022, 2023, see Figure 5.4) with an estimated 9% of contribution to the overall positive brain imaging and self-reported mood measurements. Although, this doesn’t mean it is not important, and it should not be neglected! Studies show that even if less contributing, it is an essential part of the whole contemplativeness construct. Out of these measures, it seems that most of the benefits from Compatibility in the landscape are transferred subconsciously, contributing to the mindfulness response as per frontal Theta oscillations (in 10%, sixth rank), only followed by the Landform category, which was not a significant association. Therefore, in designing for the mindfulness experience, Compatibility of the landscape elements should be taken under consideration by the designer, but there will be other, more important aspects to consider before. The associations of the Compatibility component with Alpha oscillation were not significant, so it is not clear whether it contributes to wakeful relaxation.In the design for self-reported (subjective) good mood, the Compatibility score also contributed as a last category (7%, seventh rank) to the overall positive valence scores. This suggests that the Compatibility considerations are important for inducing self-reported good mood, but it may not be within the primary focus of the landscape designer.

Scoring of Compatibility dimension

I Look at the landscape 
II Consider these questions 
- Is there chaos and clutter within the scene? 
- Are there any odd elements that do not fit the composition? 
- Did the designer do a good job balancing out manmade and natural objects? 
- Are there any potentially interesting objects or views obscured? 
- Is the scale of objects adequate and balanced? 
- Is there anything else potentially confusing or disturbing about the design? 

III Give your score 
5 or 6 points: If the physical and visual relations between elements are worked out well by the designer and there is an explicit spatial order, simplicity, and harmony between the natural and man-made elements. 
3 or 4 points: If the physical and visual relations are not clear or some elements are disturbing the harmony and balance. 
1 or 2 points: If the physical and visual relations are not worked out well or are random. Or if there is chaos, clutter, and lack of harmony. 

