Landform
7.1 LOOKING UP TOWARDS THE SKY
We should all look up towards the sky more – to disconnect from the banality of day-to-day life and to contemplate on the bigger picture. Our daily lives are very much happening on the lowest tiers of the atmosphere, right above the ground. Most human activity, including urban space design, is also firmly tied to the surface of the Earth. This perhaps explains why the sky in its cool, distant vastness and serenity is so distant, and not always a part of the designer’s considerations (Zelanski & Fisher, 1996). However, this is not the case for contemplative landscape design, which is very much a skyward-oriented design.
In every outdoor space, the sky is the ceiling and Earth’s atmosphere is the huge dome encapsulating every landscape. Looking towards the sky delivers the longest possible view and a feeling of vastness. This is why looking up to the sky, watching the sunset or moving clouds, and observation of the stars at night has been always connected to contemplation. The sky itself is not an element that can be designed, but the designer can certainly use some particular strategies to stimulate the visitor to look up. This can be achieved through manipulation of attention by what is present on the ground as well as the consideration of the skyline – the line, along which the sky seems to touch the Earth, and the visible horizon (Smardon et al., 1986) – an outline of the ground meeting the sky.
As a general rule, inserting vertical, topiary elements onto the skyline as opposed to having it emphasized by horizontal or flat objects is one strategy to make us look up (Figure 7.1). Elements with a pointy top, for example, triangular roofs, pyramids, or a cypress tree, all serve as arrows pointing our visual attention upwards.
 

Figure 7.1 Natural lines separating the lawn from shrubs make the ground seem smoothly undulating; and topiary forms of cypresses stimulate looking upwards. Serralves Park, Porto, Portugal.
In cities, the skyline – as an outline of buildings seen against the sky – is a symbolic urban form assigned the crucial role of reconnecting the city with the vastness of its geographical territory, its specific identity, and its aesthetic values (Bostanci, 2015). A skyline is a sort of signature of the city and is subject to careful urban planning and management (AlKodmany, 2013, see Figure 7.2). Opening the view from a space of contemplation towards the urban skyline, which is harmonious and diverse with its elements pointing vertically towards the sky, may be a powerful strategy to contribute to the contemplativeness of the landscape. This would happen by combining the effect of driving the observer’s eyes towards the sky with the effect of creating the psychological distance to the city and all it means to us in our daily lives by perceiving it from a physical distance, as one outlined shape against the sky.
The viewer can also be stimulated to look up at the sky by setting up the point of view on a certain level. If focal or featured elements are located above the head of the viewer, they will usually look up automatically. The point of view of the visitor can be changed when changing the position from standing to sitting down or lounging. Then, while looking around, they will see much less sky and much more ground, and if the designed elements lead our attention up, they will then look up. Conversely, when viewers find themselves on top of a tall element (a hill or terrace, etc.), they will see more of the sky around them, and their eyes will be driven to look down. The seating furniture can also facilitate looking up, by tilting it backwards and prioritizing lounge chairs, beds, and swings over standard flat seats (see Figure 7.3).
Figure 7.2 Different city skylines: (a) New York – quite homogenous and packed; (b) Paris – flat and predominantly low-rise; (c) Dallas –various balanced shapes, considered the best in the USA (Al-Kodmany, 2013); (d) Hong Kong – follows the natural hills in the background, known for night illumination; (e) Porto – old town, follows the natural topography of the granite rock on top of which it is built.
Figure 7.3 Examples of park furniture that can stimulate the viewer to gaze towards the sky: (a) chaise-lounges at Parc André Citroën, Paris, France, (b) tilted chairs, Parque da Cidade, Porto, Portugal.
The design does not have to necessarily make us raise our heads upwards to see the sky. It can be achieved by designing a mirror, for example, a mirror of still water reflecting the sky (Hermann, 2005; Hou, 2015). Due to the sky-mirroring effect of water, we commonly perceive the water as blue, while in fact, in its pure form, it is transparent. The blue spaces in cities, which are connected to water features and reservoirs, have been associated with various mental health benefits (Beute et al., 2020; White et al., 2010; White et al., 2013). It is then good to acknowledge that what makes the water blue is in fact the sky, and, more specifically, the atmosphere encasing our planet, which gives the perception of a blue tint once the sunlight penetrates through it (this is the principal reason why from the cosmos our planet appears blue). The reflective properties of the water as an archetypal element are amplified with an additional symbolic dimension of sky with its inexhaustibility, boundlessness, and vastness (see Chapter 10, “Archetypal Elements”) (Issa, 2019).
7.2 MOUNDS AND NATURAL TOPOGRAPHY
Environmental psychology research reveals a general human preference for “smooth ground” with an undulating, moundy topography (Kaplan et al., 1998). Most of the lines and edges in natural landscapes have no sharp edges. There are also much less straight lines and arguably no perfect geometric figures, as compared to our built-up, engineered world. Therefore, smooth shapes remind us of the structures created by nature (see Figure 7.4).
Contemplative landscape design should build on the existing natural lines following the topography and natural movement of the earthly elements. However, if the manifestations of these processes have already been disturbed, or are not visible, then it is advised to mimic the natural landform artificially through landscape design. Hermann, in his description of the contemplative design of the Woodland Cemetery in Stockholm, writes extensively about the contribution of the smoothness of the landform to the overall contemplative experience. He describes the soothing and peaceful character provided by levelling and smoothing over the ground, creating a large clearing with an elevated heart of the cemetery called Meditation Grove (Hermann, 2005). He further explains how shaping the landform into irregular mounds fosters the perception of natural lines and how asymmetry contributes to contemplation through the reorientation of the visitor:
“In the overall site strategy, the architects subordinated notions of symmetry to an overall dominant asymmetry. Asymmetry suitable for achieving an almost natural sanctuary [and] creates the continuous surprise from changing vistas and the constant subtle reorientation of visitors as they move through the cemetery.”
(Hermann, 2005, p. 60)

Figure 7.4 Naturally undulating landforms that became signature landscape features: (a) post-volcanic smooth mounds with agriculture plots’ edges following the natural lines. Miradouro da Lomba do Vasco, Sao Miguel, Azores, Portugal; (b) “Chocolate Hills” – haycock-shaped geological formations became a famous tourist attraction for their shape, Bohol, Philippines.
Box 7.1 Neuropsychological parameters of Landform
Figure 7.5 Proportional area charts illustrating the extent to which the Landform component contributes to the positive neuropsychological outcomes of urban park users. Results are based on the correlation of expert CLM scoring, EEG scores, and self-reported mood scores acquired from research studies in urban parks. Hatched fields denote non-significant associations. Source: Olszewska-Guizzo et al. (2022, 2023).
Landform throughout the analyses showed lesser importance for the contemplativeness of a scene when compared to the other CLM categories. It ranked sixth in contribution to the overall mental health and well-being scores as per neuropsychological studies (Olszewska-Guizzo et al., 2022, 2023, see Figure 7.5), with an estimated 10% of contribution to the overall positive brain imaging and mood self-reports measurements. This means it is less important than the other CLM components, for what our perceptual skills can capture from a scene, but it still has a significant value and contribution to the CLM as well as design.
The association of Landform scores were not significant with either of the brainwave oscillations scores. This means that whether the landscape scene was high or low in Landform scores, it did not significantly affect the low frequency brainwaves such as Alpha and Theta. This could be because the aspects connected to the Landform scoring are not related to these particular brainwave patterns, or that we simply need more research to explore this topic.
On the other hand, the Landform characteristics did contribute to the self-reported (subjective) good mood, (10%, sixth rank), so this CLM component matters for the overall positive valence scores. This suggests that the Landform considerations are important for inducing self-reported good mood, but it may still not be within the primary focus of the landscape designer if the situation requires trade-offs.


Scoring of the LANDFORM dimension:
I Look at the landscape 
II Consider these questions 
Is the ground flat or uneven? 
Is the topography natural? 
Are there any mounds or hills? 
Are the lines on the ground straight or undulating? 
Can you see waves and curved lines? 
Can you see distinct geometric figures with straight 
lines and sharp edges? 
Are there a lot of sharp angles and edges? 
If you were to walk bare-foot over the ground, 
would it be soft and comfortable?

III Give your score 
- 5 or 6 points: If the landform is undulating, natural lines are visible and the skyline shape is driving the eye to look at the sky. 
- 3 or 4 points:If the landform is not very significant to this scene or it is hard to say anything about it.
- 1 or 2 points: If the landform is explicitly flat or rugged.