Layers of the Landscape

Arguably, the physical attribute of contemplative landscapes that most profoundly unlinks us from stress and worries of everyday life is the Layers of the Landscape. Already recognized in traditional Japanese garden design under the concept of shakkei – ‘borrowed scenery’, it dates back to the eighteenth century. This is a technique that incorporates the faraway view, simulating the continuity of a garden with a distant landscape, even if the garden was located in the city, and thus creating a contemplative and transformative experience. In Japanese gardens, oftentimes, the borrowed scenery featured distant mountains, hills, marine landscapes, and forests, but also man-made objects like distant houses and architectural features (Itō, 1973).
6.1 THREE DISTANCE ZONES IN THE LANDSCAPE
The three landscape layers (distance zones) as defined in the classic and reputable Foundations for Visual Project Analysis (Smardon et al., 1986) are: foreground, middleground, and background. Foreground in the context of an expansive natural landscape reaches between 0 to 0.25–0.5mi (~400–800m) from the observer, who still is a direct participant of it and can have an impression of the immediate details, such as leaves or bark. In the foreground, the intensity of color and its value will be at a maximum level. The second to the observer is the middleground (or midground). It expands between the less and more distant landscape elements. It reaches the distance of 0.25–3mi (~400–800m to ~4.8–8km) from the observer. And because elements of the landscape start to look blurry, it is characterized by possible visibility of conflicts of form, color, shape. or scale. Colors will appear more blue and softer than those of the foreground, and some sharpness or contrast will be decreased. The furthest layer of the landscape is the background, which expands from 3–5mi to the end limits of eyesight (~4.8–8km and more). The effect of aerial perspective is very apparent here: because of the substantial masses of air between the eye of the observer and faraway elements, these appear bluer (a large volume of air has a blue tint). Due to the aerial perspective, the background surfaces and forms also lose textural detail, emphasizing the outline of the shapes: “Silhouettes and ridges of one land mass against another are the conspicuous visual parts of the background with skyline, the strongest line of all” (Smardon et al., 1986, p. 320).

Figure 6.1 Natural landscapes with three distance zones (Layers of the Landscape) enhancing the  overall quality of the view: (a) Neskaupstadur, Iceland, (b) Esporões lookout point, Portugal.

In dense and compacted urban environments, the definition of three distance zones will look much different compared to the “big outdoors”. For example, the Royal Gardens of Versailles is considered a landscaped space providing one of the farthest views in garden history: its main visual axis from the palace to the end of the garden is 2.1mi (~3.4km). Also, in Hyde Park, London, the farthest view is about 0.6mi (1.1km). None of these green spaces reaches as far as to compare with the standards of Smardon et al. However, in both Versailles and Hyde Park, while looking into the farthest possible view we would experience depth of the landscape scene and easily notice three distance zones as well. This effect would be especially strong if we turn our eyes from the dense and “short sighted” urban landscape towards the Layers of the Landscape. In most urban green spaces with typical dimensions, the human eye cannot encounter even the middleground of Smardon’s standards (the longest view in Prospect Park, Brooklyn, New York is only 780m, Porto City Park in Portugal is 650m, and so forth). For the purpose of the Contemplative Landscape Model to be useful at the city scale, a view of 0.25mi (~400m) and more is considered to be a long-distance view. Strictly following the theory of distance zones, it is where the foreground turns into the middleground. The boundary between the foreground and middleground can be determined by the visibility of detail of the  objects in the closest proximity to the observer – at approximately 65 ft (20m, see Figure 6.2).
6.2 PSYCHOLOGICAL COMFORT OF LOOKING AFAR
The visibility of the Layers of the Landscape continuously shows great importance for human perception through direct links with the psychological mechanisms of a “prospect-refuge” theory (Appleton, 1996) as well as “being-away” – part of attention restoration theory (Kaplan, 2001). The “prospect-refuge” defines the characteristic of the most preferred and evolution-based spatial situation for humans, namely a safe viewpoint, which allows one to see an extent of the view without being seen (Appleton, 1996) or, as it has been aptly described, a “womb with a view” (Buss, 2000). A “prospect-refuge” spatial structure is an integral part of savannah-like landscapes, which have been claimed to be the most preferred types of landscapes for humans. The “savannah preference” theory builds on the capacity of early humans to survive thanks to their physical adaptation to savannah conditions – large, open spaces with a far view of scattered trees, water, and covered with uniform grassiness (Balling & Falk, 1982). The faraway view allowed humans to scan for approaching predators and threats. The savannah-like landscapes together with its prospect refuge characteristics are omnipresent in contemporary urban parks, gardens, and resorts.
Figure 6.2 Three distance zones, foreground, midground, and background in (a) rural and (b) urban landscapes. In the city, visual distances are generally shorter.
Creating long-distance views is not only beneficial due to evolutionbased safety concerns. A major part of creating the restorative and healing experience is through distraction and reorienting one’s mind from the banality and problems of everyday life.
“The health of the eye seems to demand a horizon. We are never tired, so long as we can see far enough.”
(Emerson, 2009, p. 10)
To create a psychological getaway from the problems constraining us on a daily basis, what is really helpful is a physical separation from them. attention restoration theory points at four properties of restorative environments, including “being away”, which is defined as “being distinct, either physically or conceptually, from the everyday environment” (Kaplan, 2001, p. 2). Long distance views can stimulate this away feeling and a reorientation from every-day life (especially life within an urban context), because being away goes beyond simply “getting away from it all” and means switching between various activities and changing the perspective of viewing things and everyday activities.
Figure 6.3 Long-distance views in dense and compact cities: (a) achieved through opening the views towards the water, Qinyin Lubo Scenic Spot, Xiamen, China (b) opening views towards buildings and stimulation to look up, Telok Ayer Green, Singapore.
According to the authors, being able to see far significantly improves the quality of the urban landscape through the visitor’s perception capability. The long-distance views stimulate in the observer a sense of comfort, personal freedom and pleasure, which all contribute to stress reduction and improvement of the quality of life in the city (Skalski, 2007; Tuan, 1990). The human perception formed itself during a long process of environmental adaptation and the development of certain perceptional capabilities. If we are unable to utilize our natural perceptional skills (here, the sense of vision), because we are surrounded by different kinds of visual barriers, then we can experience and accumulate a sense of discomfort or even confinement.
“Urban landscape tightly filled with architectonic objects significantly limits liberty of sight use. Such spatial environment provokes a natural need of a distant view, up to horizon or at least at the sky. The need of distant view in many cases can be a desire, resulting from a human nature of a hunter, consolidated in our genes. Fulfilling this desire can be done beyond our will or completely consciously.”
(Skalski, 2007 p. 44)
According to Skalski, opening the views in the cities (especially those located on flat terrains) is very important for improving the well-being of people inhabiting those cities. Another benefit of long distance views is described in a broad study by Bates (2021), an author of alternative therapy aimed at improving eyesight without the use of glasses or lenses. He suggested that nearly all acquired eye problems are caused by the habitual strain of the eyes, so switching the visual attention between the close, middle and far distance, repeatedly and continuously, blinking and relaxing from time to time, may significantly improve one’s eyesight quality. Even though his findings were never fully approved by academic medicine, the mechanism of switching between the distance zones seem to stress the importance of far vistas, especially for people who spend time mostly indoors and focus their eyes on screens or other close objects.
Box 6.1 Neuropsychological parameters of Layers of the Landscape
Figure 6.4 Proportional area charts illustrating the extent to which the Layers of the Landscape component contributes to the positive neuropsychological outcomes of the urban park users. Results are based on the correlation of expert CLM scoring, EEG scores, and self-reported mood scores acquired from research studies in urban parks Source: Olszewska-Guizzo et al. (2022, 2023).
Layers of the Landscape throughout the analyses showed to have the lead importance for the contemplativeness of a scene, in comparison with the other CLM categories. It ranked first in contribution to the overall mental health and well-being scores according to neuropsychological studies (Olszewska-Guizzo et al., 2022, 2023, see Figure 6.4), with an estimated 18% of contribution to the overall positive brain imaging outcomes taken together with the self-reported mood measurements. This suggest that opening the views in cities to the faraway elements of landscapes is of utmost importance for the positive neuropsychological reactivity to the landscape view and should be prioritized by landscape architects. Especially if there is no room to include any other categories of CLM within the design.
Out of all considered measures, it seems that most of the benefits from Layers of the Landscape exposure are transferred subconsciously (they showed more in the brain scans than in the paper-based self-reports), contributing more to the wakeful relaxation, marked by the frontal Alpha oscillations (in 19%, first rank) and slightly less to mindfulness response, marked by frontal Theta oscillations (in 18%, first rank).
With regards to the self-reported (subjective) good mood, the Layers of the Landscape score contributed less but still quite high (19%, second rank) to the overall positive valence scores. This suggests that Layers of the Landscape considerations is also very important for inducing self-reported good mood. Taken together, these results show that especially in urban green space design, introducing strategies to amplify the score of Layers of the Landscape should be a primary goal. If, however, it is not possible (for example, if the space is too visually compacted), then the other following CLM categories should be prioritized.

Scoring of Layers of the Landscape dimension:
I Look at the landscape 
II Consider these questions 
- Is there a depth in the view? - What is in the foreground? 
- Can you see the background? How far away is the 
farthest object? 
- What is in between the fore- and background? 
Are the eyes of the observer automatically driven to faraway objects? 
- Is the faraway view aesthetically pleasing? Or 
maybe is it somewhat disturbing? 
- Are the visible layers of the landscape important to the overall scene, or is something else dominating the view? 
III Give your score 
- 5 or 6 points: If the far-distance view is visible in the scene. Fore-, middle- and background are visible and the layers greatly enhance the visual quality. 
- 3 or 4 points: If the visible layers only moderately enhance the overall visual quality. 
- 1 or 2 points: If the layers are not visible at all or they do not enhance the overall visual quality.
